On 20-NOV-2023, the USCG Sector Puget Sound IMD notified the NOAA NW SSC that the 80’ Tug El Capitan began to release a residual sheen in Deer Harbor, Orcas Island, WA on 18-NOV. In 2020, the vessel had previously sunk and the USCG removed all accessible fuel products. On November 18th, the vessel began to release a residual sheen, IOSA hard boomed the area. On the 19th, Global dove on the vessel and plugged one vent, replaced sorbent boom and pads and no additional sheen has been observed. [SEP] https://www.news.uscg.mil/Press-Releases/Article/3599468/coast-guard-partners-with-local-agencies-to-prevent-pollution-threat-san-juan-c/   PRESS RELEASE | Nov. 28, 2023 Coast Guard partners with local agencies to prevent pollution threat, San Juan County   SEATTLE ???€? Crews from Coast Guard Sector Puget Sound, Washington Department of Ecology, and the Islands???€? Oil Spill Association (IOSA) responded to the sinking of the 80-foot vessel El Capitan at West Sound Marina on Orcas Island, Saturday, Nov. 18.  Watchstanders at Sector Puget Sound command center received notification Nov. 18 from the West Sound Marina that the El Capitan was rapidly sinking. A sheen was observed emitting from the vessel when it sank next to the pier in approximately 30-feet of water.  Coast Guard Pollution Responders notified IOSA, who responded to the scene and worked with the marina to deploy boom and absorbents. Several trailers of additional boom were brought on site by IOSA as a precaution. The Washington Department of Ecology also responded to assist IOSA. IOSA monitored the vessel over the weekend.  Additionally, the USCG opened the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund and hired Global Diving and Salvage to assess the vessel for any additional threats of pollution. Divers assessed the vessel Sunday but did not report any signs of oil discharge.  Crews also performed a shoreline assessment and determined there was no reported impact to the shoreline or wildlife in the area. There were no Southern Resident Killer Whale sightings in the area at the time of the incident.  The area around the vessel remains boomed as a precaution. IOSA has been monitoring the vessel and marina for additional pollution threats since the vessel sank. IOSA reported sheening in the marina outside the boom on Nov. 26. The USCG responded to investigate and hired a contractor to remove and replace any soiled boom.  The exact source of the sheening on Nov. 26 remains under investigation by the USCG. A joint effort is currently underway with all agencies, the Washington Department of Natural Resources and West Sound Marina, to determine future disposition of the vessel.  Previously, in November 2020, a joint effort between the Coast Guard, Washington Department of Ecology, Washington Department of Natural Resources, and San Juan County determined the fuel and oil onboard the El Capitan posed a significant threat to the environment due to its derelict condition. Contractors removed 590 gallons of various fuels and oils.
On the morning of 17 November 2023, USCG Sector Delaware Bay notified the NOAA SSC that the 65 ft long FV Susan Rose lost power and ran aground on Point Pleasant Beach just south of the entrance to Manasquan Inlet. Vessel has 600 gallons of diesel fuel on board. No reported discharge at this time.
On November 16, 2023, at 9:10 am local, a pipeline leak was reported to the NRC. The report came from Third Coast Midstream Pipeline company. Oil sheen on water was observed around 0900. The leak location is thought to be 19 miles offshore of the Mississippi River Delta. An overflight at 1400 CST reported a slick that was 3-4 miles wide, with dark oil scattered throughout. A NOAA ship working in the area also reported the slick. The USCG requested trajectory information and resources at risk. The Coast Guard, Main Pass Oil Gathering Company, LLC and the Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office established a Unified Command in response to a crude oil release in the Gulf of Mexico near the Main Pass Oil Gathering (MPOG) company's pipeline system close to Plaquemines Parish, southeast of New Orleans, Louisiana, Thursday. The Unified Command is coordinating with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, Forefront Emergency Management, and other federal, state, and local agencies to respond to the incident. [SEP] A Wildlife Hotline Number for the response has been established, and is being remotely manned by Ms. Rhonda Murgatroyd of Wildlife Response Services. 713-703-5297 [SEP] | Nov. 20, 2023 UPDATE 1: Unified Command monitors, responds to MPOG11015 incident U.S. Coast Guard Heartland Office: 504-671-2020 Cell: 618-225-9008 NEW ORLEANS ???€? The Unified Command continues to monitor and respond to an oil discharge near the Main Pass Oil Gathering (MPOG) company's pipeline system, known as the MPOG11015 incident, near Plaquemines Parish, southeast of New Orleans. The Unified Command conducted multiple overflights Friday and Saturday. Overflight teams observed visible oil Friday moving southwest away from the Louisiana shore. Three skimming vessels are working to recover oil on the surface. On Saturday and Sunday, overflights observed intermittent surface sheens. Additional surface observations are ongoing with two Coast Guard cutters on scene and additional overflights. Remotely operated vehicles, deployed Friday morning, continue to survey the pipeline with no findings of a source area at this time. The vehicles will continue to survey the pipeline if weather conditions permit. The Unified Command is working diligently to determine the source of the release. There have been no reports of injuries or shoreline impacts at this time. The volume of discharged oil is currently unknown. The total pipeline length is 67 miles and was closed by MPOG at 6:30 a.m. on Thursday. Initial engineering calculations indicate potential volume of crude oil that could have been released from the affected pipeline is 1.1 million gallons. The Coast Guard continues to oversee the coordinated effort to mitigate the impact of the oil discharge. The Unified Command is coordinating with federal, state and local agencies to ensure the safety of the public, protect the environment, and respond to the incident. A marine safety information broadcast is being transmitted to all vessels in the area. The cause of the incident is under investigation. A claims phone line has been established at 228-273-2400. For the most up-to-date information follow us on Facebook and Twitter. Press releases will be posted to the D8 News Room. -USCG- [SEP] OR&R Provides Scientific Support to U.S. Coast Guard for Oil Spill off Louisiana Coast DEC. 4, 2023 ???€? On November 16, 2023, OR&R and U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) response teams activated as reports came in regarding a leak in a pipeline in the Gulf of Mexico, off the coast of Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana. The source of the leak was reported to be at least 19 miles offshore of the Mississippi River Delta, near the pipeline system of Main Pass Oil Gathering, LLC (MPOG). A Main Pass Oil Gathering Company, LLC helicopter aircrew spotted crude oil during an overflight near Main Pass, Louisiana, November 16, 2023. (Courtesy photo by Main Pass Oil Gathering Company, LLC) In response to the crude oil release, known as the MPOG 11015 incident, a Unified Command was established by the USCG, the responding party MPOG, and the Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office, in coordination with NOAA, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, Forefront Emergency Management and other federal, state and local agencies to develop and execute a response strategy. For decades, the USCG and NOAA have played a joint role in ensuring vital operational support and response capabilities for oil and chemical spills. After the reports were received, OR&R began deploying to provide response support on-scene to the incident management team, the Federal On-scene Coordinator (U.S. Coast Guard), and Unified Command based in Belle Chasse, Louisiana. On-scene, response teams identified the leak as crude oil, however, the exact location, time of the release, and the amount of oil is still being evaluated. Initial engineering calculations indicate the potential volume of oil is 1.1 million gallons (about one tenth the size of the Exxon Valdez spill). On November 17, USCG aircraft and NOAA satellite imagery observed a slick of over 40 miles in length, heading southwest from the leak location; however, overflights in the following days observed intermittent surface sheens. Since November 21, no new or continuous oil discharge has been reported. Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) surveys and assessments are ongoing by the pipeline owners, USCG, and Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) to determine the source location of the spill. ROVs will continue to survey the pipeline, as weather conditions permit. OR&R mobilized to provide scientific support OR&R has provided scientific support, including spill trajectory and fate modeling, information on resources at risk, and coordination of NOAA capabilities with the spill response. OR&R obtained and analyzed samples from the pipeline to characterize the oil???€?s physical and chemical properties, enabling the response team to better predict how the oil will move and its impacts on the environment. A NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator reported to the incident command post on November 16, and additional NOAA OR&R staff continued to arrive in the following days. The staff included a science team led by OR&R???€?s chief scientist to conduct small science experimentation, drifter deployment, and data collection???€?separate from the response???€?to support future oil spill response and damage assessment technologies (funded as a research effort). In the week following the arrival of responders on-scene, overflights observed intermittent surface sheens. Oil features such as golf ball-size tar balls and larger emulsified oil patties have been observed by vessels on-scene. Surface monitoring is ongoing with additional overflights and shoreline surveys in the Mississippi Delta. Initially, weather conditions during the week of November 17 impeded full access to some remote areas for surveying. On November 19, OR&R began the initial phase of a Natural Resource Damage Assessment (NRDA), with a lead coordinator deploying on-scene for vessel deployment and assessments. OR&R engaged with trustees, including the Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, on natural resource injury assessment and will continue to work together as they move through the NRDA process. Experts across NOAA contribute to spill response Beyond OR&R???€?s specific technical and scientific support, NOAA also engaged in multiple ways to the incident. At the time of the incident, NOAA Ship Oregon II was conducting a groundfish survey in the surrounding area and played a key role in the initial observation of the slick, and reported observations to OR&R to assist with assessments and trajectory forecasting. NOAA Fisheries supported the response effort by engaging with the Incident Command Wildlife Branch to identify oil-impacted sea turtles and marine mammals and possible tactics to help those animals, including rehabilitation. NOAA Fisheries also provided best management practices to mitigate the impact of cleanup activities on marine habitats and species, and provided technical support related to endangered and threatened species in the area including the Rice???€?s whale and sea turtles, for both response and Natural Resource Damage Assessment. In addition, NOAA???€?s National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service produced Marine Pollution Surveillance Reports, using satellite imagery, to identify oil presence. Weather forecasts produced by NOAA???€?s National Weather Service(link is external) supported the response and associated scientific support products. Next steps for response effort On November 22, the on-scene NOAA staff officially demobilized as the response became focused on locating the spill source and size. In the following weeks, NOAA will continue to support the USCG remotely in its response efforts. The Natural Resource Damage Assessment process to support restoration of injured natural resources will also continue, with support from OR&R???€?s Assessment and Restoration Division. New information on the incident(link is external) will be provided by the Unified Command. Learn more about NOAA???€?s role supporting oil spill response efforts and injured natural resource restoration. [SEP] PRESS RELEASE | Dec. 5, 2023 UPDATE 4: Unified Command monitors, responds to Gulf oil incident U.S. Coast Guard Heartland Office: 504-671-2020 Cell: 618-225-9008 NEW ORLEANS ???€? The Unified Command continues to monitor and respond to an oil discharge near the Main Pass Oil Gathering (MPOG) company's pipeline system, known as the MPOG 11015 incident, near Plaquemines Parish, southeast of New Orleans. The cause and source of the incident remain under investigation. The entire length of the main pipeline has been assessed to date, along with
On November 12, 2023, the USCG Sector Columbia River notified the NOAA SSC NW that the Tug Cindy B and Barge St. John collided with a pipeline at the Columbia Pacific Bio Refinery on the Columbia River earlier this morning near Clatskanie, OR. There is potential for approx. 600 bbl, although only residual R99 renewable diesel is reported in the pipeline, there is no spill or sheen observed at this time. The pipeline has been shut down, an OSRO is on-site, the area is boomed and a vac truck is removing oil product.
On 30-AUG-2023, approx. 450 gallons of cooking oil released upriver of the Black River Pump Station in Renton, WA. Thus far, this has been a State led-response, the WA DFW and WA Dept of Ecology have been responding and Clean Harbors is contracted for cleanup operations. Currently, approx. 130 gallons of oil have been recovered and there continues to be concern with oiled wildlife and vegetation and low dissolved oxygen in the water. The Black River Pump Station fish ladder currently remains closed. On 13-SEPT, WA Dept. of Ecology contacted the NOAA SSC for advice on SCAT, cleanup recommendations, and NOAA Fisheries advice on whether or not to open the fish passages for upcoming salmon migrations.
On 17-Aug, USCG Sector Puget Sound contacted the NOAA Hazmat Duty Officer to notify them of an anhydrous ammonia leak aboard the 169 ft F/V Pacific Producer that is docked near the Foss Waterway in Tacoma, WA. Aside from the anhydrous ammonia leak, the vessel is currently slowly taking on water and there remains 3,000 to 4,000 gallons of diesel aboard.
On 25-JUL-2023, the USCG IMD Astoria called the NOAA SSC about a report of tar balls by a good samaritan at Ocean Shores, WA.
In the afternoon of July 17th, the USCG Sector Puget Sound IMD contacted the NOAA HDO and relayed the case to the SSC NW. A 48’ recreational vessel grounded in Reid Harbor off of Steward Island, WA. An estimated 10-15 gallons of diesel has been released, with a maximum potential of approx. 500 gallons on board the vessel. An initial ICS-232 Resources at Risk was requested.
On June 30, 2023, the USCG Sector Puget Sound notified the NOAA Northwest SSC that on 29 June the 108-foot vessel ‘YTB823’ broke free from its mooring and ran aground off Brownsville, WA. This is a prior USN vessel now privately owned. There is a max. potential of approx. 20k gallons of diesel and 80 gallons of motor oil, there are no signs that the tanks were damaged. There has been no sheen observed in the water.
On June 24, 2023 a train derailed in Reed Point, MT sending rail cars carrying molten sulfur and molten asphalt into the Yellowstone River. Amounts released into the river are unknown at this time. The incident is under the U.S. EPA's jurisdiction who requested a Fate & Effects report.Photo credit:  Yellowstone County Sheriff's Office
On June 13, 2023, the USCG Sector Columbia River notified the SSC for the Pacific Northwest that the  47’ F/V Nadine is taking on water off the southern Oregon coast. Search and rescue operations rescued all persons on board. There is max. potential for 1200 gallons of diesel and 100 gallons of hydraulic oil on board, no oil is observed to have released. A trajectory was requested.
NOAA SSC was notified that the Washington State Ferry Walla Walla ran aground in Rich Passage, on Bainbridge Island, WA, while enroute from Bremerton to Seattle. There are approx. 600 passengers aboard with no report of injuries. A tug and USCG vessels are on-scene. There has been no observed oil release. Peak low tide is 2000 this evening. A plan to offload passengers is being developed. .
On March 16, 2023, the EPA Region 10 contacted the NOAA SSC that a BNSF train derailed near the Swinomish Channel, Anacortes, Washington, There is a potential of approx. 7,000 gallons of diesel. There are other loaded cars still on the tracks.
On February 22, 2023, the USCG Sector Puget Sound contacted the PNW SSC that the Tug Tulalip is aground near the Lopez Island Ferry Terminal in the San Juan Islands, WA. The tug has the potential for approximately 400 gallons of diesel, no release is reported at this time. The USCG requested a Resources at Risk and a local weather forecast.
On February 10, 2023, a locomotive on a freight train derailed near Toledo, OR. The locomotive's tank was punctured and released an estimated 2,000 gallons of red dye diesel onto the soil and tracks. Since the derailment, the product has drained into a catch basin and a sheen has been reported on the Yaquina River. Oregon DEQ and US FWS are responding on scene.
On Jan-19, 2023, a 36' Navy vessel sank after colliding with the Naval Station Bangor security zone boom. The vessel sank in 150 ft of water with 80 gallons of diesel on board.  The USCG contacted the NOAA NW SSC on behalf of the Navy to request a RAR.
On January 5th, 2023, the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary contacted the NOAA Emergency Response Division to request modeling support for a large abandoned gill net found near a coral reef restoration site.  Gill nets are not allowed in Florida waters.  Sanctuary staff requested a modeling hind-cast to help determine where the net might have originated.
On October 28,  2022, USCG Sector VA notified the NOAA SSC that the F/V TREMONT, a 114.5 foot, 399 GT vessel sank at 0400 approx. 55 NM SE of Assateague Island,, Virginia. The vessel has a total diesel fuel capacity of approx. 31,000 gallons as well as machinery lube oil onboard. The cause of the casualty is under investigation. The Sector VA FOSCR requested a worst-case discharge trajectory for possible shoreline impact and resources at risk be conducted for the formulation of their response strategy.
During the evening of 24-OCT-2022, USCG Sector LA/Long Beach contacted their NOAA SSC to request trajectory support for a 70’ wood fishing vessel that sank within the Port of Los Angeles.  The vessel has been actively sheening since at least 1600 hrs, reportedly has an 830 gallon max potential of diesel on board.  As the USCG attempts to boom the area around the vessel, they requested a trajectory estimate through sunrise tomorrow to help plan out a first light assessment of the area. [SEP] U.S. Coast Guard 11th District PA Detachment LA/LB Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment LA/LB Office: (310) 521-4260 After Hours: (310) 781-0619 PADETLA@uscg.mil PA Detachment LA/LB online newsroom   Coast Guard conducts oil recovery from sunken fishing vessel in San Pedro SAN PEDRO, Calif. ???€? On Friday the Coast Guard completed cleanup efforts after the vessel Bill Ketner, a 70-foot fishing vessel, partially sank at the pier in San Pedro last Monday. At approximately 7 p.m. on October 24, Coast Guard Sector Los Angeles-Long Beach Incident Management Division received notification that the Fishing Vessel Bill Ketner had partially sunk at the pier with a max capacity of 2,500 gallons of diesel onboard. Capt. Ryan Manning, the Federal On-Scene Coordinator, approved the opening of the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund and the contracting of an oil spill response organization. The organization was contracted to raise the vessel, remove the fuel still onboard, and clean up the discharge in the water. Working alongside Los Angeles Port Police (LAPP) and the California Department of Fish and Wildlife: Office of Spill Prevention and Response (OSPR), Coast Guard Pollution Responders oversaw the successful clean-up operation. The vessel was lifted and stabilized using eight flotation air bags. Once the vessel was raised to the surface of the water, the hull was patched and fuel removed, LAPP took possession of the vessel for further disposition. ???€?Our main priority of containing the pollution was met thanks to the cooperation and coordination with our Port Partners,???€? said Petty Officer 2nd Class David Britt, a Coast Guard Marine Science Technician and member of the Incident Management Division. ???€?The Coast Guard and our partners are committed to the protection of our sensitive Southern California ecosystem.???€? Clean-up efforts concluded on Friday and totaled four days. -USCG-
On 15-SEP-2022, USCG Sector Columbia River notified NOAA SSC of a mystery sheen that was observed approx. 1 mile offshore from Depoe Bay, OR. The sheen extends for approx. 700 yards, the quantity and type of product is unknown, a strong diesel odor was reported. A trajectory is requested to determine the extent of coverage for an overflight and if the oil will have shoreline impacts.
On August 16, 2022, the USCG Sector Columbia River notified the NOAA SSC that the F/V Lady Debbie ran aground south of the Grays Harbor Jetty in Westport, WA. There is potential for 6,000 gallons of diesel.
On July 28, 2022, the USCG Sector Columbia River contacted the NOAA SSC regarding the partially sunk and sheening, wood-hulled M/V TOURIST No. 2.  A 300'x400' sheen is observed around the vessel located among pilings offshore of 6th Street.  It was reportedly fueled recently with 500-600 gallons of diesel.  USCG response staff on-scene inquired if local businesses with water intakes might be at risk. [SEP] Tourist No. 2, a retired ferry in Astoria, Oregon, sits partially submerged July 28, 2022. The Coast Guard is investigating the cause of the vessel sinking. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Diolanda Caballero) [SEP] News Release   U.S. Coast Guard 13th District PA Detachment Astoria Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment Astoria Office: (503) 861-6380 After Hours: (206) 819-9154 PA Detachment Astoria online newsroom UPDATE: Coast Guard, partner organizations conclude removal of pollution threats from sunken ferry in Astoria, OR Editors' Note: Click on images to download high resolution version. ASTORIA, Ore. ???€? The Coast Guard concluded operations to remove pollution threats from the ferry vessel Tourist No. 2 in Astoria Friday. Global Diving and Salvage recovered approximately 525 gallons of diesel from the vessel with sorbents and active pumping. Five cubic yards of hazardous material were recovered. ???€?Despite extensive damage to the starboard side of the vessel, Global Diving and Salvage was able to successfully mitigate a significant threat to the environment and Columbia River as a whole,???€? said Lt. Cmdr. Jarrod Pomajzl, the Incident Management Division Chief at Coast Guard Sector Columbia River. ???€?I commend all parties involved for their diligent and adaptable response to this challenging incident.???€? The final disposition of the vessel will be coordinated through the Oregon Department of State lands, in conjunction with the City of Astoria and the owner. The cause of the incident is under investigation.
On June 28, 2022, NOAA Fisheries received a report of a dead entangled killer whale floating approx. 30 miles offshore Southwest of Newport, Oregon and contacted the NOAA NW SSC to request a drift model to see if the whale will go ashore and where they may be able to locate it for sampling.
On 13-APR-2022, the USCG  contacted the NW SSC to report that a 50’ vessel sank in Hawkes Marina, Everett, WA. There is an estimated 80 gallons of diesel on board, with a maximum potential of 400 gallons.  The vessel is leaking and creating a visible sheen. The case has been federalized and Global Diving is hired. A localized trajectory and resources at risk were requested.
On April 8, 2022, a well owned by Sandpoint Texas LLC experienced an equipment failure, discharging an estimated 8 gallons of sweet crude into a bermed marsh area near High Island.  The discharge was reported by the RP on April 11, 2022, and is at the same site but not the same well as the discharge which occurred on April 1, 2022.  On April 12, MSU Port Arthur contacted the Texas SSC to request input on marsh clean-up methods.
At approximately 0400 on 21-Mar2022, the tug vessel Western Mariner lost power in Neva Straits, north of Sitka Sound, and was forced aground via contact from its tow barge Chichagos Provider. The Western Mariner has a total capacity for 45000 gallons of diesel. It is unknown how much fuel was onboard at the time of the grounding.  The vessel is leaking diesel. MSD Sitka is requesting and trajectory and fates analysis for the leaking diesel. [SEP] from USCG [SEP] Photo Release   U.S. Coast Guard 17th District Alaska Contact: 17th District Public Affairs Office: (907) 487-5700 After Hours: (907) 654-4112 17th District online newsroom Update: Coast Guard, partner agencies continue response efforts for tug grounding incident in Neva Strait, Alaska Editors' Note: Click on images to download high resolution version. KODIAK, Alaska ???€? A unified command consisting of the Coast Guard, Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation and Western Towboat continue to lead the response efforts for the grounded tug in the Neva Strait, March 21, 2022. As of March 29, 2022, the Western Mariner was successfully refloated and towed to a commercial dock in Sitka, Alaska. The Western Mariner had an estimated 43,500 gallons of fuel onboard at the time of the grounding. During the response all tanks, voids and spaces onboard the tug were inspected and emptied of diesel fuel. Global Diving and Salvage conducted measurements from recovery efforts of clean fuel and oily water mixture. Recovery estimates include approximately 33,040 gallons of fuel transferred from secure tanks to storage, 4,453 gallons of fuel recovered from the damaged tank, and 700 gallons were recovered from skimming operations.  Deployed responders collected 20 cubic yards of saturated sorbent material. Shoreline cleanup operations were conducted on three sites in Neva Strait following Shoreline Treatment Recommendations developed by the Shoreline Cleanup Assessment Techniques (SCAT) Team. Other shorelines in the incident area were determined to be clear of significant and actionable oil presence. Operations included deluge operations that utilize high-volume-low-pressure seawater to flush trapped oil from the beach which was collected by sorbent material.  Environmentally sensitive areas identified by local stakeholders to be at risk were surveyed to assess oil impacts. On Monday, April 4th, the SCAT Team returned to Neva Strait to conduct an assessment of the shoreline treatment operations and determined that one site requires further treatment that will take place the morning of April 5th. Additional assessment on total shoreline cleanup efforts will be conducted in the near future.  No sheening was observed in areas that were opened to state fisheries or test fishing, as is consistent with the State of Alaska???€?s zero-tolerance policy with respect to fuel contamination of seafood. The unified command has engaged with the Tribes to determine concerns and whether subsistence harvest areas have been impacted due to the incident. If you see an oil spill or find areas of oil contamination, you can make a report to the National Response Center (NRC) at (800) 424-8802. The NRC will generate a bulletin based on your report that will be sent to the appropriate Federal and State agencies. -USCG- Photo caption: Pictured is the area on March 31, 2022, of where the Western Mariner, an 83-foot inspected tug, ran aground in Neva Strait March, 21, 2022, while towing Chichagof Provider, a 286-foot containerized barge. A unified command consisting of the Coast Guard, Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation, and Western Towboat continue to lead the response efforts for the grounded tug. (U.S. Coast Guard courtesy photo)
During Hurricane Laura (08/25/20), an estimated 2,400 barrels of crude oil condensate was discharged from a storage tank at the Fieldwood Grand Chenier separation facility, breached the containment area, and contaminated the surrounding marsh.  The RP recovered much of the oil in the containment area and was working on the surrounding marsh when operations were suspended due to the arrival of Tropical Storm Beta (09/19/20).  In February of 2022, MSU Lake Charles contacted NOAA SSC for input on the feasibility of an in-situ burn (ISB) to address the residual contamination. The ISB is tentatively scheduled for late April, pending RRT concurrence.
On January 15, 2022, an oil spill occurred during offloading from the Italian tanker Mare Doricum to the REPSOL-operated La Pampilla refinery submarine terminal #2. Source of the spill was a broken manifold on the underwater pipeline. Cause of the break is still under investigation. An estimated 11,900 barrels (updated) of Buzios crude oil (from Brazil) was spilled. ERD deployed two Scientific Support Coordinators to represent NOAA on the nine-person U.S. National Response Team delegation that went to Peru. Other members of the US team included six from the United States Coast Guard and one from the Fish & Wildlife Service. The mission was to support the Government of Peru with satellite analysis, oil trajectory predictions, oil spill remediation techniques, oiled wildlife response and emergency management. [SEP] Image date is Jan 28, report date is Jan 29   See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] The UN has issued it's report (in Spanish) on the oil spill in Peru. Link to article here ((DIPROMIN.com) and pasted below. ******************** The Joint Environmental Emergencies Unit, made up of the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), issued a report on the findings and recommendations following the oil spill in front of the Ventanilla sea on January 15. The article details that among the main findings of the environmental disaster -product of the oil spill in the Peruvian sea- is that the Government had an initial difficulty in determining what was the best mechanism for conducting and coordinating response actions in the face of "this major environmental emergency. Likewise, it maintains that  great challenges have been evidenced in everything that has to do with coordination to meet the needs of the affected population  and with articulating the demands of the Government with the offer received by international cooperation actors. Regarding the recommendations, the United Nations Environmental Emergencies Unit advises the Government to develop a specific mechanism for responding to this type of environmental disaster. More specifically,  it recommends that the Government approve a national contingency plan in the next six months in the event of a disaster caused by the contamination of hydrocarbons or other polluting substances in the sea. It should be noted that this plan would have to prioritize the adaptation and adoption of intersectoral coordination mechanisms for the response to a major environmental disaster, determine the national authority designated to lead the response, as well as describe the preparation actions that the different entities must take to develop or maintain internal response capabilities, among others. Likewise, it is recommended that  once the plan is approved, the other competent entities involved in the response develop or adapt their contingency plans to said national plan as soon as possible. It is worth mentioning that the report was also prepared with the support of the Civil Protection Mechanism of the European Union, the Government of Norway and the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Mechanism (UNDAC). [SEP] Peru Oil in DESIS Imagery  Attached are the amended map products and GIS files derived from the DESIS image on January 29th. After further image processing and georeferencing adjustments were made, additional oiled areas were detected and appended to the original report, resulting in this updated product.  See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Attached are satellite-imagery derived map products produced by the NOAA NESDIS Satellite Analysis Branch. [SEP] Oil spill: Peru receives assistance from 15 countries and int'l organizations   Photo: ANDINA/Andr??s Valle 16:32 | Lima, Feb. 7.      Peru has so far received specific schemes of technical assistance and international cooperation from at least 15 entities, among friendly countries and international organizations, so as to tackle the Repsol oil spill on the Lima coast, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs reported on Monday.   According to the government department, said support is the result of the efforts made by this sector to allow both bilateral and multilateral cooperation in the face of the environmental emergency caused by the oil spill.   The arrangements resulted in the arrival of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Joint Environment Unit (JEU), which evaluates and provides strategic advice to national authorities on the impact and risks.   The UN Technical Mission has been strengthened with the support of the EU Civil Protection Mechanism in the sending of associated experts; as well as with the sending of a merchant marine expert from Spain; two experts from the Centre of Documentation, Research and Experimentation on Accidental Water Pollution (CEDRE); and a Norwegian expert from the Norwegian Coastal Administration (ACN); among others.   In addition, the ministry noted that Peru has been receiving cooperation from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for the sending of satellite images to the National Commission for Aerospace Research and Development (CONIDA) and the forthcoming arrival of nine experts in the management of disasters and responses to oil incidents.   For its part, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has pledged to send a technical research mission to analyze hydrocarbon residues in the biosystem and seabed, which will strengthen local capacities.   In turn, the Permanent Commission of the South Pacific (CPPS) activated the cooperation mechanism provided for in the Agreement on Regional Cooperation in Combating Pollution of the South-East Pacific by Hydrocarbons and other Harmful Substances in Cases of Emergency, as well as its Complementary Protocol.   Other solidarity responses were received from the Andean Development Corporation (CAF), the Pacific Alliance, and the Andean Community, among others.   Oil spill   On January 15, an oil spill was reported in Ventanilla district's sea area. The Repsol company said that the spill was caused by the strong waves recorded along the Peruvian coast following the eruption of an underwater volcano off Tonga in Oceania.   (END) NDP/VVS/RMB  Published: 2/7/2022   From: https://andina.pe/Ingles/noticia-oil-spill-peru-receives-assistance-from-15-countries-and-intl-organizations-880056.aspx [SEP] Peru Oil in Worldview 3   See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Peru Oil in KOMPSAT5 Satellite   See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] News report by Ojo-Publico.com ("Public Eye") 13Feb2022 regarding possible corrosion on submarine terminal that may have lead to oil spill. Images reveal corrosion in tubes that broke off in Repsol spill | Public Eye (ojo-publico.com)   Diagram shows general set up of ship mooring to underwater marine terminal. [SEP] MPSR Jan 18 [SEP] Peru Oil in Radarsat Satellite (Image 1 and 2) Peru Oil in Worldview Satellite (Image 3 and 4)   See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] MPSRs Jan 19 [SEP] On Feb 24, 2022, the US Embassy in Peru released the following Tweet regarding the US National Response Team efforts to support the oil spill.  Text from Tweet (translated) "U.S. scientists and specialists from @NOAA and @USCG continue to collaborate with Peru in the response and recovery from the oil spill, providing satellite images and proposing methods to clean up its coasts." https://twitter.com/USEMBASSYPERU/status/1496858706180456452?t=-1muhWOwdpdsj8y_ccVYsQ&s=08
On 09-DEC-2021, the USCG Sector Puget Sound was notified of an oil sheen at Terminal 5 on Harbor Island in Seattle, WA. At high tide, there has been a visible persistent sheen and black oil on the fenders. The source is under investigation. The NOAA SSC was contacted 6-JAN for phone support.
On November 29, 2021, the USCG Sector Columbia River IMD Astoria requested a trajectory of a partially afloat 50-gallon mystery drum adrift in the Columbia River. There is no visible sheen.
On 4-NOV-2021, the NOAA SSC was notified by the USCG MSU Portland that the abandoned and derelict vessel (ADV) Alert sank in the Columbia River near Portland, Oregon. The Tugboat Sakarissa, also an ADV, was moored to the Alert. Previous efforts in 2020 removed hazardous materials from both ships. There is a slight observable sheen in the water from oily residue on the Alert and concern that the Sakarissa will break free and float downriver. The CG has requested phone support, NOAA SSC to assist with consultations and technical assistance as needed.
On 04-NOV-2021 at 2000, the NOAA SSC was notified by the USCG SCR IMD Astoria of a derelict barge leaking oil. There is an estimated maximum potential of 27,000 gallons of an unknown oil product. There is thick oil observed on the vegetation at the high tide waterline. The case has been federalized, the USCG and Clean Harbors will be on scene in the morning.
At 0840 hrs on 02-OCT-2021, USCG Sector Los Angeles/Long Beach contacted their NOAA SSC regarding a spill report.  NRC Report No. 1318437 described an unknown sheen in the water at 1813 hrs local time on 01-OCT.  Roughly 45 minutes later, a SENTINEL 1-A satellite image was obtained that became the basis for a NESDIS Marine Pollution Surveillance Report (MPSR) issued at 0015 hrs local (0815 UTC) on 02-OCT.  USCG field teams investigating the reports in the morning, observed a large area of thick in the vicinity of the NRC and MPSR reports, black oil roughly 3.25 NM offshore and requested trajectory support. [SEP] NOAA Fact sheets from JIC Site [SEP] Please find the attached Liaison Update #3 for the Pipeline P00547 Incident in Orange County. [SEP] Attached is the initial notification regarding OSPR???€?s response to a report of oil in federal waters offshore of Huntington Beach (Orange County). More information will be shared as it becomes available. [SEP] OSPR Liaison Update No. 2, 03-OCT-2021 [SEP] Southern California Spill Response UPDATE 8: Unified Command continues response to oil spill off Orange County beaches   Editor's Note: Daily press briefings are being canceled until new significant information becomes available LONG BEACH, Calif. ???€? Unified Command operations are taking place Friday in Orange and San Diego Counties in response to the coastal oil spill. Updates as of Oct. 8 at 7:30 a.m.: More than 900 people are conducting response operations To date, 5,544 total gallons of crude oil have been recovered by vessel 13 barrels of tar balls were recovered yesterday Approximately 172,500 lb of oily debris has been recovered from shorelines Shorelines continue to be surveyed and cleaned Four overflights were conducted on Thursday and five are scheduled for Friday 14,060 feet of containment boom have been deployed For the latest wildlife information visit  https://owcn.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/pipeline-p00547-incident In Orange County, the public can expect to see Shoreline Cleanup Assessment Teams and work crews equipped in protective gear, monitoring, inspecting, and cleaning the beaches to ensure that appropriate cleanup actions are taken. For your safety, the public is advised to avoid any contact with visible oil on the beaches. Assessment teams are checking the following locations in San Diego County for any visible signs of oil: North Team: Santa Margarita River Harbor Beach/Oceanside City Beach Agua Hedionda Lagoon Del Mar Fairgrounds/San Dieguito Lagoon Los Penasquitos Lagoon La Jolla Shores/Scripps Vessel owners impacted by the oil spill can file a claim by calling 1-866-985-8366. If your vessel has been impacted by the oil spill, we want to remind people not to clean their own boats, and to not use soaps or dispersants. If you spot oil, please contact tarballreports@wildlife.ca.gov. The cause of the spill remains under investigation. For updates on the fisheries closures, visit https://socalspillresponse.com/fisheries-closure/.   Manage Subscriptions   Unified Command Contact: (562) 568-5590 Call/Text Email: inquiries@socalspillresponse.com Website: https://SoCalSpillResponse.com [SEP] Please find the attached Liaison Update #7 for the Pipeline P00547 Incident in Orange/San Diego Counties. [SEP] Please find the attached Liaison Update #9 for the Pipeline P00547 Incident in Orange/San Diego Counties - Oct 10, 2021. [SEP] Please find the attached Liaison Update #11 for the Pipeline P00547 Incident in Orange/San Diego Counties. [SEP] UPDATE 4: Unified command continues response to oil spill off Orange County Beaches OCTOBER 5, 2021 Unified command continues response to oil spill off Orange County Beaches LONG BEACH, Calif. ???€? The Unified Command is continuing its response Tuesday to the oil spill off the coast of Orange County. The Unified Command contracted commercial divers to identify the source of the leak. The divers on Monday validated Remotely Operated Vehicle footage showing no indications of oil release at the potential source of the leak. Diver reports and ROV footage show that a 4,000-foot section of the 17.7 mile-long pipeline was displaced with a maximum lateral movement of approximately 105 feet and had a 13-inch split, running parallel to the pipe. Overflights and shore-based responders continue to monitor at the ocean and shore for oil impact. The National Response Center received a report of a unknown sheen of unknown source on Friday evening. These types of reports are common and in many cases, the sheen reported can be natural seepage of oil or sheen that is never located. NOAA satellite imagery was reported to agencies early morning reporting a possible oil anomaly. Crews from California Department of Fish and Wildlife???€?s Office of Spill Prevention and Response responded to the report to investigate before sunrise. Conditions were foggy and the crew returned to shore. The Coast Guard and Orange County Sheriff deployed at first light once fog lifted to investigate. A Coast Guard aircraft was diverted to support the investigation. On Saturday morning, the company confirmed a release of oil from a pipeline. Updates as of Oct. 5 at 7 a.m. 4,788 gallons of crude oil have been recovered. An estimated 15.67 miles of light oiling was reported along shorelines. Six miles of shoreline have been cleaned and crews continue cleanup efforts Seven aircraft are assigned with 14 flights scheduled for Tuesday. 11,360 feet of containment boom have been deployed. Eight oiled wildlife have been recovered. The latest info can be found at https://owcn.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/pipeline-p00547-incident 328 response personnel, with additional assets being deployed The cause of the spill remains under investigation. For updates on the fisheries closure, visit https://socalspillresponse.com/fisheries-closure/. [SEP] Please find the attached Liaison Update #15 for the Pipeline P00547 Incident in Orange/San Diego Counties. [SEP] Please find the attached Liaison Update #16 for the Pipeline P00547 Incident in Orange/San Diego Counties. [SEP] Attached is Liaison Update #33 for the Pipeline P00547 Incident. "As of Monday, December 27, Unified Command completed signoffs for all shoreline segments related to the Pipeline P00547 response....  If new instances of oiling are observed, please contact the National Response Center (800-424-8802) and California Office of Emergency Services (1-800-852-7550)."
This hotline was opened on August 27, 2021, to capture information regarding Hurricane Ida.  Ida is expected to make landfall later this week and result in major impacts to coastal Louisiana. As a multi-hazard event with possible involvement of multiple NOS programs, the NOS Disaster Coordination Dashboard has been established for situational awareness, communications, coordination, and documentation across NOS program offices and up to (and through) NOS leadership. Future updates will be provided as the incident evolves.
On the late evening of August 25, 2021 the NW SSC was notified of a partially sunken 42 foot derelict vessel in Coal Creek Slough. A rainbow sheen was seen around the vessel and responders have wrapped sorbent sweep around the vessel. USCG is working with DNR and Washington Ecology to refloat the vessel, remove all hazmat and oil, then sink the vessel where it is located during the morning of August 26. NOAA SSC provided the USCG with a verbal resources at risk.
On the evening of July 14, 2021 but NOAA NW SSC received a call from USCG Sector Columbia River about a milky, white discoloration in the Columbia River between Crims Island and Fisher Island along the Oregon boarder. There was no spill or sheening reported. The USCG asked for any biological or natural events that could cause the discoloration.
On July 11, 2021, the NOAA SSC received a call from Sector Columbia River about a 580 foot long bulk carrier that had run aground in low tide in the Columbia River about a mile down stream of the Louis and Clark Bridge. A tug is was standing by to assist with refloating the carrier at high tide. The NOAA SSC provided a verbal resources at risk assessment.
On the afternoon of July 5, 2021 the NOAA SSC received a notification from Sector Columbia River of a vessel aground on Fisher Island in the Columbia River. The USCG had plans to investigate further.
On April 27, 2021, the USCG Sector Columbia River notified the NOAA SSC that an approx. 80’ F/V Tiffany is releasing oil. The vessel has been derelict South of Lord Island on the Oregon side of the Columbia River for several years.  There is a maximum potential of 10,000 gallons of fuel, but the actual quantity and other hazmat products aboard the vessel are unknown. Divers are assessing stability, lightering operations have begun and a soft boom has been deployed around the vessel.
In the evening of 05-MAR-2021, USCG Sector San Francisco contacted their NOAA SSC regarding a tug boat & towed fishing vessel drifting towards shore off Bodega Bay, CA.  During transit from WA State, the Tug HUNTER was towing the F/V AMERICAN CHALLENGER when there was a loss of propulsion and both vessels started drifting to the NNE.  At the time of the report, the Tug HUNTER had deployed their anchor, but it had not yet caught bottom.  USCG indicated that the primary pollution concern was from the Tug HUNTER, reportedly carrying 26,000 gallons diesel and 1,100 gallons.  USCG requested a hypothetical trajectory estimate in the event of a grounding/spill to inform field investigations the following morning.  The tug was able to anchor and was later towed to port but the fishing vessel grounded on rocks in a remote area south of Estero de San Antonio. A response effort is underway. [SEP] American Challenger Response ???€? Update #1 https://calspillwatch.wordpress.com/2021/03/08/american-challenger-response-update-1/ March 7, 2021 MARIN COUNTY, Calif. ???€? The Coast Guard, California Department of Fish and Wildlife???€?s Office of Spill Prevention and Response, Marin County Office of Emergency Services and Greater Farallones National Marine Sanctuary continue to respond as a unified command to a grounded vessel along the shoreline north of Dillon Beach.???€?  Initial reports were received by Coast Guard Sector San Francisco watchstanders at 8:45 am Friday, March 5,???€?about the 90-foot vessel the American Challenger being towed southward by the Tug Hunter from Puget Sound, Washington, when the Tug Hunter lost propulsion due to a rope entangling the propeller.???€? At 1:00 am, March 6, the vessel grounded on a rocky shoreline near Dillon Beach where it remains.   An investigation is underway to determine the amount of fuel aboard the American Challenger. Overflights have observed a small amount of motor oil in vicinity of the vessel but there is no extensive sheen coming from the vessel. Teams will conduct cleanup operations if recoverable.   Salvage crews assessed the vessel American Challenger with drones and developed a plan to access the vessel via helicopter to assess damage and quantify petroleum potential on vessel.  Environmental shoreline assessment teams conducted surveys in the area and reported some oil contamination on the beach in the vicinity of the vessel. Teams will respond to the area.   As a precautionary measure, 4,000 feet of boom was deployed to protect sensitive habitat, including oyster beds, in Tomales Bay. Additional booming will be deployed tomorrow.   Of the deployed boom, there will be a 100 foot gap for recreational boaters to transit at the deepest point of the channel south and east of Hog Island. If there is a threat to the oyster bed, the gap will be closed. USCG is broadcasting a Safety Marine Information Bulletin (SMIB) to inform public of protection operations in Tomales Bay.  All area beaches remain open, however Miller Boat Launch is temporarily closed to support response operations.  There have been no confirmed reports of oiled wildlife.  If oiled wildlife is seen, the public is asked not to approach the animal and instead call the Oiled Wildlife Care Network at???€?1-877-823-6926.  There are no impacts to commercial traffic or scheduled marine events at this time.  Media inquiries can be directed to???€?sectorsfpao@gmail.com.
On October 21, 2020, NOAA was notified of a spill from the SS Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship, now an artificial reef located southwest of Destin East Pass, FL. In September, sport divers reported oil sheen on the water surface and black "oil - like" substance flowing from the deck of the ship and the Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of the artificial reef and collected samples. Now, USCG requested NOAA assistance in identifying whether the ship is related to the Johnson Beach spill, reported after Hurricane Sally made landfall. [SEP] SS Thomas Heyward was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull number 236, built by Alabama Drydock and Shipbuilding Company at Mobile, Alabama, laid down 21 February 1942, and launched 31 May 1942.[3] It was named for Thomas Heyward, Jr. (28 July 1746 ???€? 6 March 1809), a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and of the Articles of Confederation as a representative of South Carolina. She was leased to Waterman Steamship Company and delivered on 31 July 1942. On 5 May 1946, the Thomas Heyward hit an unswept floating mine off of Europe.[4] Although damaged, the vessel made it safely back to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was placed in the Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, but was reactivated in 1951 for duty during the Korean War. After final retirement, the vessel was laid up in the James River in Virginia[6] for a time, then was purchased by the Florida Department of Natural Resources and prepared for final disposal as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut down to the first deck to meet U.S. Army Corps of Engineers specifications for artificial reef structures. It was sunk on 14 April 1977 off of Destin, Florida at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island pier just north of the Pensacola???€?Panama City shipping lane, in about 79 ft (24 m) of water. [SEP] Liberty Ship Schematic [SEP] https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Liberty Ship Artificial Reef slowly leaking oil off the coast of Destin By Jared Williams October 25, 2021 On Monday September 28, 2020, Coastal Resource Manager Alex Fogg was contacted by local dive operator Nancy Birchett of ScubaTech Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was completing their first offshore dive trip since Hurricane Sally when Birchett reported that the popular Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship artificial reef had experienced some damage from the strong currents and high seas associated with the storm. Ms. Birchett also observed an oil sheen on the surface and her dive masters reported a black ???€?oil-like???€? substance flowing from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo of observed oil sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Following the report, Fogg conducted an inspection with the goal of collecting samples of any observed oil-like substance. When he arrived at the Liberty ship he observed an oil sheen with small black droplets in a 100ft x 100ft area above the bow of the ship. A two-liter sample of surface water was collected in the center of the observed sheen. A dive was conducted by Okaloosa County staff to determine what the source of the leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Sally. Zoomed in section of a 3D model of the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship that was produced from data collected in October 2019. The large red rectangle illustrates the section of hull that has collapsed-in due to Hurricane Sally. The two smaller red circles indicate an approximate location of where an oil-like substance was observed rising from below deck. This model was created and provided to Okaloosa County by Reef Smart Guides. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Oil-like droplets were only observed in the water column on the bow section of the vessel and after closer inspection, two holes in the deck of the vessel were identified as the source of the leak. The area was monitored for approximately ten minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly seeping from the openings. Additionally, there was significant damage to the port side bow as the hull collapsed inward which may have disrupted once sealed bilge or oil tank material. ???€?We don???€?t know how much oil is in the vessel, but it???€?s been leaking for about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not a rapid leak, but it???€?s enough that divers and fishermen notice it. The State of Florida has been working with the Coast Guard to try and figure out a way to alleviate the issue by potentially going down there and pumping the rest of the oil out of the Liberty ship to prevent it from leaking into the environment.???€? Fogg says that reports are coming in on pretty much a weekly basis, especially after stretches of good weather when people are out there fishing and diving on it. The Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was deployed as an artificial reef in April of 1977. Back then, the stringent regulatory rules that Fogg and his team have to abide by now were not in place, as far as making sure vessels and reefs are clean prior to putting them in the water. The deployment of Liberty ships was a collaboration between the State of Florida and the military where they deployed Liberty ships across the Northern Gulf of Mexico and even over to the east coast. And because the 400+ foot vessel is roughly 7 miles from Destin???€?s east pass, it???€?s a very popular fishing and diving site. A hole in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where an oil-like substance was leaking. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) This situation isn???€?t unique to Destin. A very similar scenario actually happened in Pensacola about 15 years ago. According to Fogg, one of the Liberty ships in the Pensacola area was leaking oil and authorities went and pumped it out. Fogg says he thinks there might be a similar situation that can happen with the Thomas Heyward. Because it was the 1970s, the information on the project is very spotty, and there is not much information about how it was cleaned. Authorities don???€?t know if the residual fuel oil was actually removed from the vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it would stay sealed for the rest of its life. Hearing of an oil leak, many people might start imagining the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, where there???€?s just a geyser of oil coming out of the ground. That???€?s not the case in this situation. ???€?This is a very slow leak with very viscous liquid coming from the deck of the Liberty ship,???€? continued Fogg. As for any environmental implications that have come from the leak over the past year, Fogg says that it is hard to relate any sort of environmental impacts to an incident like this. ???€?The site of the leak is actually home to a lot of fish and from the numerous investigation dives that we???€?ve done and I have not seen any impacts to the fish,???€? he said. ???€?I can???€?t say for sure but with the amount of oil that???€?s leaking, I wouldn???€?t suspect there???€?s going to be any major environmental impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets can be seen rising to the surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Any sort of action to pump the remaining fuel oil from the Liberty ship will be handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As of this writing, there is no timeline on the removal of the residual oil, but the Coastal Resource Team will continue to monitor the leak and provide updates as they get them. [SEP] See the article below on the following website: https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico ******************************** Assessment of Sunken Liberty Ship Completed in Gulf of Mexico APRIL 4, 2022 ???€? U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Sector Mobile recently completed the assessment operations for the WWII Liberty ship, Thomas Heyward, located in about 79 feet (24 meters) of water, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island Fishing Pier just north of the Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. The vessel was intentionally sunk on April 14, 1977 off of Destin, Florida as an artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil from the bow section of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Alex Fogg, Okaloosa County. Beginning back in September 2020, reports received by the USCG, Okaloosa County Sheriff???€?s department, and a local dive company indicated an intermittent dark oil discharge from the bow of the vessel. The vessel had significant damage, believed to have been caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area September 13-16, 2020. At the request of the USCG, OR&R began providing scientific support regarding risk assessment, resources at risk, and trajectory analysis for a potential release. A NOAA Marine Pollution Surveillance Report (MPSR) was issued for the location in September 2020, indicating a discharge from the vessel coinciding with the passage of Hurricane Sally. Upon receipt of
Around 4 AM on September 14, 2020, Hurricane Sally made landfall in the vicinity of Gulf Shores/Orange Beach, Alabama as a strong Category 2 storm (sustained winds ~100 MPH). The center of the storm tracked slightly farther east than initially forecast. Very heavy rain on the east side of the storm continued as it tracked northeast. Coastal areas impacted by significant storm surge spanned from Gulf Shores, Alabama east to the Florida panhandle. Seas in excess of 20 feet were observed offshore Pensacola, Florida. USCG Sector Mobile set up incident command for hurricane response operations under their Continuity of Operations Procedure (COOP) at the NOAA Disaster Response Center in Mobile, Alabama.  NOAA disaster response support included deployment of the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator and Scientific Support Team, as well as the National Geodetic Survey Remote Sensing Division (NGS/RSD) Emergency Response aerial surveillance team, and the Coast Survey’s mobile navigation response team (NRT).  Additionally, support from NOAA included satellite imagery analysis from the Satellite Analysis Branch (SAB) of  National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS).  NOAA's Emergency Response Division and Spatial Data Branch personnel from the Office of Response and Restoration provided direct on-scene support of all pollution response operations including operation of the Common Operational Picture (COP) in NOAA's Environmental Response Management Application (ERMA), as well as data collection and management of all assessment and pollution mitigation for over 1,000 storm-impacted vessels. NOAA's Emergency Response Division also provided Shoreline Cleanup and Assessment Technique (SCAT) teams for a storm related oil spill on Johnson Beach Gulf Islands National Seashore.
On September 9, 2020,  USCG Sector Key West notified the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary that a 750 Ft Propane was adrift off of the Upper Keys.  The tanker MT Monsoon was underway with empty tanks from Belgium to Houston when it had issues with saltwater contamination of its engines, losing propulsion.  Notification only
On September 3rd, 2020, the M/V Windy K caught fire and ran aground in the St. Clair River at approximately 1600. No injuries reported. Canadian CG is on scene and responding. Sector Detroit requesting trajectory for the potential of 600 gallons of marine diesel release.
On August 14t, 2020, the USCG D9 DRAT informed the NOAA SSC of a mystery sheen and product release at a storm outfall in Buffalo, NY. The product contained in an existing boom. As of today, OSRO's have been on site for sample collection and air monitoring. Spot forecast and RAR have been requested and delivered. Mitigation plans and source identification to be determined next week after product sample has been analyzed.
On July 25, 2020, the 984-foot bulk carrier M/V WAKASHIO ran aground on a coral reef off the coast of Pointe-D’Esny, Mauritius.  The situation was initially reported as stable but in the past few days, the vessel has begun leaking fuel oil.  The vessel is reported to have approximately 1.1 million gallons of fuel and lube oils on board, but no was not laden with cargo.  On August 8, 2020, the US National Response Team and NOAA were notified via the US. Department of State, to address a formal request for assistance from the Mauritius Government.     This hotline was opened to capture information regarding the incident. [SEP] from https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-mauritius-activation-666- [SEP] NOAA Satellite Assessment of the Oil Spill in Mauritius Version 1 Published: 17 Aug Analysis: 5 Aug 16 Aug 2020
On the evening of March 19, 2020, M/V ALGOMA CONVEYER ran agroundapproximately 5 NM North of Fox River in Green Bay and partially blockedthe channel near the Green Bay Harbor Entrance Channel Light 14. The vesselexperienced a loss of propulsion prompting it to let go of its starboardanchor and then run aground. Approximately 600' of the vessel is aground. Noinjuries were reported and no reports of pollution. The vessel is carrying rock salt and 15,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil and diesel. USCG Sector Lake Michigan is requesting a trajectory and resources at risk.
On the morning of February 1, 2020, a concerned citizen reported a sunken deck barge to the NOAA Marine Debris Division (MDD). The barge sank on December 6 and is completely under water, except for two steel poles extending 6 feet from the deck of the barge.  It is reported to be in shallow water about 150 feet off the shoreline. SSC notified USCG about the barge.
Monday, October 14, 2019 at 1044 - USCG Sector Columbia River notified NOAA ERD of a 65-foot commercial fishing vessel carrying a maximum of 1000 gallons of diesel has sunk in the port of Garibaldi, Oregon. Cleanup is underway and Resources at Risk have been requested.
On the morning of October 7th, 2019, USCG Sector Buffalo notified SSC that the M/V RT. HON. PAUL J. MARTIN ran aground in the Saint Lawrence Seaway approximately 12NM North of Ogdensburg, NY near Galop Island. The vessel is taking on water at a negligible rate in the forepeak. Fuel tanks have been sounded and the crew is monitoring the ballast tanks. No pollution is present.
On September 8, 2019, the USCG contacted the NOAA SSC to report a RORO vessel, the Golden Ray had capsized off Brunswick, Georgia. The vessel was on fire. USCG was conducting rescue operations. NOAA will provide an initial trajectory analysis and Resources at Risk report. The NWS is providing spot forecasts for the incident. [SEP] from DVIDS Coast Guard crews and port partners respond to a disabled cargo vessel with a fire on board September 8, 2019, in St. Simons Sound, Georgia. At approximately 2 a.m., Coast Guard Sector Charleston watch standers were notified of the M/V GOLDEN RAY, a 656???€? vehicle carrier, listing heavily in the St. Simons Sound with a total of 24 people on board; including 23 crew members and 1 pilot. (U.S. Coast Guard photo) [SEP] Coast Guard and salvage crews extracted the remaining four Golden Ray crew members Sept. 9, 2019, in St. Simons Sound near Brunswick, Georgia. The crew members were transported by a Coast Guard Station Brunswick 45-foot Response Boat-Medium boat crew to Glenn County EMS for further medical evaluation. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Coast Guard Station Brunswick) [SEP] From: https://ssiresponse.com/ A knuckle boom excavator picks up 1-to-3-inch rock-aggregate from a container barge in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Oct. 29, 2019. The excavator guided by sonar and GPS, strategically places the rock next to the hull of the M/V Golden Ray to slow erosion. Unit Manager Reid Jackson of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, walks past a mound of gravel, Brunswick, Georgia, Oct. 25, 2019. The 1-to-3 inch rock-mixture was staged for deployment and later placed next to the hull of the M/V Golden Ray in order to slow down erosion around the vessel. Unified Command response crews begin operations to reduce further erosion of the seafloor around the M/V Golden Ray in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Oct. 29, 2019. Sonar and GPS technology guide a knuckle boom excavator as it places 1-to-3-inch rock-aggregate next to the hull of the vessel to slow erosion. [SEP] A diver descends down a ladder to inspect rock-aggregate placed around the M/V Golden Ray to prevent erosion and stabilize the wreck in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Nov. 9, 2019. [SEP] Removal of rudder and propeller from the Golden Ray is complete. BRUNSWICK, Ga. ???€? The St. Simons Sound Incident Response Unified Command has successfully completed the removal of the rudder and propeller from the Golden Ray today. Crews worked over the past week to complete the operation which was hampered by adverse weather conditions at times. The removal of approximately 130 tons of weight will help reduce stresses to the hull of the wreck. Portions of the ship that were removed are being donated to the State of Georgia for use as artificial reefs in areas designated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Crews work to remove the propeller from the M/V Golden Ray, St. Simons Sound, Dec. 20, 2019. Crews transfer the propeller from the M/V Golden Ray to the work barges for safe removal, St. Simons Sound, Dec. 20, 2019. Crews remove the rudder from the M/V Golden Ray and transfer it to the work barges for safe removal, St. Simons Sound, Dec. 20, 2019. This entry was posted in Incident Updates, News Releases, Response Imagery on December 20, 2019 12:15 PM. [SEP] Unified Command Continues St. Simons Sound Incident Response: Update 25 Date: 10.12.19 Contact: Joint Information Center (912) 944-7122 Unified Command has completed the lightering of the forward fuel oil tanks onboard the M/V Golden Ray. More than 225,000 gallons of fuel have been removed to date. Lightering of the remaining fuel and lubricant tanks continues. Maritime experts engaged in the response have determined that it is not possible to safely right and refloat the vessel in a fully intact condition. Consequently, Unified Command is developing plans to remove all of the M/V Golden Ray???€?s hull, components, and cargo by disassembling the vessel in place. This remains a complex situation but additional information about the removal plan and the expected timeline will be shared with the public as and when available. Pollution mitigation and response efforts will continue throughout the duration of the removal operation. Unified Command???€?s priorities are ensuring the safety of responders and the public, protecting the environment, and completing a full removal of the vessel. All parties involved in the response are fully committed to the successful completion of these operations. Specialists from the Unified Command are conducting water monitoring at 22 sites under a long term plan to ensure the safety of the public. The Georgia Department of Health has issued a swimming and fishing advisory, and members of the public are encouraged to visit the Georgia Department of Public Health website or call (844) 863-0325 for further public health information and advisories. Members of the public should not touch oil or attempt to rescue oiled birds or wildlife. They should instead report any sightings of oil to (800) 424-8802 and report any oiled wildlife to (800) 261-0980. A claims number has been established for those affected by the incident (888) 850-8486. [SEP] A Coast Guard Air Station Savannah MH-65 Dolphin helicopter lands on the side of the Golden Ray, a 656-foot vehicle carrier, to drop off supplies for Coast Guard crews and port partners who attempt to locate and rescue the remaining four crewmembers aboard the Golden Ray, Sept. 9, 2019, in St. Simons Sound, near Brunswick, Georgia. A Coast Guard Air Station Savannah MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrew, Station Brunswick boat crews and other port partners rescued 20 people the morning of Sept. 8, after it was reported the vessel was disabled and listing. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Ryan Dickinson) [SEP] Coast Guard and rescue crews, along with port partners, attempt to locate and rescue the remaining four crewmembers aboard the 656-foot vehicle carrier Golden Ray, Sept. 9, 2019, in St. Simons Sound, near Brunswick, Georgia. A Coast Guard Air Station Savannah MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrew, Station Brunswick boat crews and other port partners rescued 20 people the morning of Sept. 8, after it was reported the vessel was disabled and listing. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Ryan Dickinson) [SEP] Regulations Licenses News Careers Places DNR Glynn County shellfish harvest area to re-open Brunswick, Ga. Thursday, November 7, 2019 The recreational shellfish harvest area in Glynn County south of Downing Musgrove Causeway between Jekyll Island and Brunswick will re-open to the public at 7 a.m. Friday, Nov. 8, 2019. Mark Williams, commissioner of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, signed an administrative order Thursday, Nov. 7, 2019, to re-open the area in Jointer Creek. The area was previously closed Oct. 3 due to precautionary concerns regarding from the capsized Motor Vessel Golden Ray in the St. Simons Sound. The re-opening comes after staff with DNR???€?s Coastal Resources Division surveyed and evaluated the area and observed no sign of visible contamination. The harvest area is also hydrologically isolated from the St. Simons Sound by two major tidal nodes ???€? one in the Intracoastal Waterway and the other in Cedar Creek east of the Sidney Lanier Bridge. The October closure of the area was made out of an abundance of caution following two significant releases of pollutants from the Golden Ray. At no time were pollutants observed in the shellfish harvest area. There have been no major pollution-related incidents involving the Golden Ray since Sept. 30. Shellfish may only be harvested with handheld implements. Harvesters may pick oysters a half-hour before sunrise until a half-hour after sunset. Oysters must measure no less than three inches from hinge to mouth, unless the oyster cannot be removed from a legal-size oyster without destroying it. Recreational quantity limit is two bushels of oysters per person, per day, with a maximum of six bushels per boat. Recreationally harvested oysters cannot be sold commercially. Harvesters must have a valid Georgia fishing license. The Golden Ray overturned Sept. 8 in the St. Simons Sound south of the St. Simons Pier. It was carrying 24 crew, who were all rescued, 4,151 vehicles and more than 350,000 gallons of fuel. To date, about 302,000 gallons of fuel have been safely removed from the ship. The response operation is being handled by the Unified Command, which is made of three entities: the responsible party, the U.S. Coast Guard and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Anyone with questions regarding the Unified Command may contact the command???€?s Joint Information Center at 912-944-7122 or visit www.ssiresponse.com. For a map of the Glynn County recreational shellfish harvest area, visit https://coastalgadnr.org/approvedrecharvestareas. For questions regarding the shellfish harvest re-opening, contact DNR???€?s Tyler Jones at 912-230-9709. [SEP] Response crews repel into the hull of M/V Golden Ray and clear a path for oil spill equipment to safely remove oil from the steering gear room, St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Nov. 5, 2019. The complex pollution recovery and mitigation operations in a ship of this magnitude demands methodical planning and meticulous execution. [SEP] Date: 10.10.19 Contact:
On Friday, August 02, 2019 at 0830 PDT NOAA ERD was notified of a 40 foot fiberglass hull fishing vessel hard aground off Cape Disappointment State Park, Washington. In the early morning hours, the vessel missed a channel marker and grounded on charted pilings from an old structure. As the tide ebbed, the vessel remained stuck and capsized above the pilings. At least one 12-inch crack in the vessel's hull was observed to be leaking fuel. Vessel owner-hired contractors worked with Washington State Department of Ecology to place containment boom around the vessel.  The USCG requested a trajectory.  The vessel was successfully de-fueled on Saturday (8/3) and removed from the water on Sunday (8/4).
On June 26, 2019, USCG Sector Puget Sound contacted NOAA ERD to request a trajectory and resources at risk for a potential release from a barge carrying an estimated 3,000,000 gallons of oil that grounded at its berth at Pier 23 on Harbor Island, Seattle, Washington. This is a potential release, no spill has occurred at this time.
On May 10, 2019, the NOAA Emergency Response Division was notified by the USCG of a vessel collision at approximately 3:20pm near Houston, TX. Information is preliminary at this time, but the M/V Genesis River collided with two tank barges in the Houston Ship Channel near Bayport Texas. Each barge has a capacity of 25000 bbls (approx 1 million gallons) of a gasoline blending stock. Amount released is unknown at this time. The M/V Genesis River, loaded with butane and propane, is reportedly taking on water but not spilling any petroleum or cargo at this time. ERD is providing weather and trajectory products. [SEP] Two barges involved in a collision are removed from the Houston Ship Channel, May 15, 2019. Kirby barge 30015T was transferred to the Southwest Shipyard at Channelview, while barge MMI 3041 was transferred to Barbour???€?s Cut Turning Basin. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Auxiliarist Rusty Pumphrey) [SEP] "Current estimates predict a release of 9,000 barrels of the blend stock Reformate into the Houston Ship Channel. There are no injuries reported at this time." [SEP] Aerial view of skimmer boats and skimming equipment removing the last of the product around the collision site on the Houston Ship Channel on May 14, 2019 near Bayport. [SEP] UPDATE 7: Unified Command removes barges involved in collision from Houston Ship Channel HOUSTON ???€? The Unified Command, consisting of U.S. Coast Guard, Texas General Land Office, Port of Houston Fire Department and Kirby Inland Marine, have successfully removed two barges involved in a collision from the Houston Ship Channel, Wednesday. The Captain of the Port of Houston-Galveston has opened the Houston Ship Channel without restrictions and vessel traffic has returned to normal operations. As of 12 p.m., 41 vessels are awaiting inbound passage through the channel and 24 are awaiting outbound passage. ???€?The successful removal process is a credit to precise planning and risk assessment by the various agencies, barge owner and contract personnel who responded to this incident,???€? said Lt. Cmdr. Muhammad Ali Cochran, federal on-scene coordinator. ???€?I am pleased that we have been able to safely remove these barges from the incident site and facilitate the return of normal commerce and activity in the ship channel.???€? Kirby barge 30015T, the barge damaged from the collision, was transferred to the Southwest Shipyard at Channelview, while barge MMI 3041, the overturned barge, was taken to Barbours Cut Turning Basin where lightering operations will take place. The movement of the barges was completed without incident in less than four hours and there have been no reports of release of product into the water. Air monitoring will be ongoing at both locations. Skimming vessels continue to collect a small amount of product from sheen at the initial incident site. Crews will assess shorelines for any remaining presence of product. Boom placed in some sensitive areas over the last several days will begin to be removed once those locations are determined to have sustained no impact from the spill. Water quality testing teams are conducting sampling and are assessing the need for shoreline remediation. Initial water quality test results are expected to be available to response officials on Thursday. Involved with the response include the U.S. Coast Guard, Texas General Land Office, Port of Houston, Kirby Inland Marine, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Galveston County Health District, Texas Health and Human Services, Center for Disease Control and Prevention, as well as city and county officials who have been representing the interests of their communities, citizens and businesses. The incident occurred late Friday afternoon after the 755-foot tanker Genesis River and the tug Voyager collided at Lights 71-74 in the Houston Ship Channel. There were no crew injuries associated with the incident and the cause remains under investigation. Key phone numbers: Claims Hotline: 1-800-241-9010 Regional Poison Control Center: 1-800-222-1222 Impact to fish and wildlife: 979-215-8835 Air monitoring information: 281-757-3017 (available through May 15th) Joint Information Center: 281-755-4670 Updates and resources are available at www.bayport-response.com ### [SEP] On May 10, 2019, the NOAA Emergency Response Division was notified by the USCG of a vessel collision at approximately 3:20pm near Houston, TX. Information is preliminary at this time, but the barge Kirby 30015 and M/V Genesis River collided in the Houston Ship Channel near Bayport Texas. The barge has a capacityof 25000 bbls (approx 1 million gallons) of a gasoline blending stock. Amount released is unknown at this time. The M/V Genesis River, loaded with butane and propane, is reportedly taking on water but not spilling any petroleum or cargo at this time. ERD is providing weather and trajectory products. [SEP] From the NTSB report, (This screen capture from wheelhouse video on board the towing vessel Voyager shows the moment when the LPG tanker Genesis River struck barge 30015T, March 10, 2019. Source: Kirby Inland Marine) [SEP] News Release # 4 Unified Command Continues Aggressive Response to Bayport Channel Vessel Incident Members of the Unified Command established in response to Friday???€?s tanker / tug collision near Bayport, Texas continue to deploy material and personnel resources to limit environmental impacts and fully reopen the Houston Ship Channel to maritime commerce. The incident occurred late Friday afternoon when the tug Voyager was stuck by the 755-foot tanker Genesis River near Lights 71-74 in the Houston Ship Channel. While there were no crew injuries associated with the incident, approximately 9000 barrels of gasoline blend stock was released into the channel from one of two barges being pushed by the tug. The second barge was overturned and remains near the channel. The cause of the incident remains under investigation. Current response priorities established by the Unified Command of federal, state and local officials and representatives of Kirby Inland Marine are the health and safety of persons living or working in the area, including those responding to the incident, protection of water quality and marine life in Galveston Bay, shoreline protection and clean up, and the safe and timely removal of the two damaged barges. Since the incident occurred, response officials have continually conducted air monitoring throughout the area, posting results of that monitoring on the response organization???€?s website, www.bayport-response.com. As of noon today, 2700 samples have been taken and analyzed. Concerns regarding odors that may have resulted from the incident should be addressed to 281-757-3017. For further health concerns or questions, the regional poison control center can be reached at 1-800-222-1222 Water quality testing teams are also contacting home and property owners along the bay to conduct sampling and assess the need for shoreline remediation. Shoreline residents wishing to verify the identity of spill response personnel seeking access to property may call 281-757-3017. As of 12 pm today, the Unified Command reports a significant commitment of assets throughout the impacted area including: 334 federal, state and local response personnel engaged in both planning and implementing the response and clean-up operations 8 skimmers are in operation The deployment of 20,550 feet of product containment and absorbent boom to limit the spread of spilled product Salvage assets on site include multiple spud barges to secure the damaged barges in place, a crane barge, a lightering barge and lightering pumps. Shoreline Cleanup Assessment Teams deployed to areas where product may have reached shore. Salvage teams have secured the barges in their current locations near the channel and are beginning to remove cargo from those barges. Work is expected to continue throughout the day with an established priority of ensuring the protection of the Bay from the additional release of product from the barge. Once cargo is removed from the barges, they will be relocated from the incident area. Although a partial closure of the ship channel remains in effect, one way ship and two way barge traffic has been restored. The United States Coast Guard reports that there are 47 outbound vessels and 48 inbound vessels waiting to make safe passage through the channel as of 2 p.m. Sunday. The previously established navigation safety zone was expanded at 11 a.m. Sunday to include the area from the western shores of Lower Galveston Bay, extending south to Eagle Point in San Leon, east up to but not including the Houston Ship Channel, then extending north up to but not including the Bayport Ship Channel. All boaters are prohibited from exiting Clear Creek into the bay or operating in the area covered by the safety zone. A telephone hotline has been established for persons wishing to report impacted fish or wildlife: 979/215-8835. Persons wishing to pursue a claim in the response to the incident may call 800/241-9010. This entry was posted in News Releases on May 12, 2019. [SEP] The Unified Command urges that the public: Avoid all visible sheens on the water Thoroughly wash any impacted skin with soap and water Stay clear of containment boom on the water Consult a healthcare professional should specific and serious health concerns arise Concerns regarding odors that may have resulted from the incident should
In the evening of 16-APR-2019, NMFS Stranding Network staff contacted their NOAA SSC regarding a gray whale carcass that had washed ashore near Pacifica, CA.  A field necropsy is scheduled for 17-APR-2019, after which the carcass would be towed offshore.  NMFS requested a carcass drift estimate to aid in determining how far offshore to tow the carcass so it does not re-beach in the upcoming days.
On December 9, 2018, the USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the NOAA SSC regarding an equipment failure on a wellhead casing in Lake Washington/Rattlesnake Bayou, near Port Sulphur, LA.  The discharge amount is estimated to be ~129bbls of crude/water/gas per day.  The source was not reported as secured.  USCG is requesting a trajectory and potential resources at risk. [SEP] PORT SULPHUR, LA, UNITED STATES 12.10.2018 Photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Lora Ratliff U.S. Coast Guard District 8     Coast Guard Sector New Orleans is continuing to respond to an active oil discharge near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, December 10, 2018. The Coast Guard is working with local and state agencies in response to the release. U.S. Coast Guard photo [SEP] USCG Image [SEP] Coast Guard responding to oil discharge in Rattle Snake Bayou   NEW ORLEANS ???€? The Coast Guard is responding to an oil discharge near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, Sunday.   Watchstanders at Coast Guard Sector New Orleans received a report from the National Response Center that a crude oil well in Rattle Snake Bayou, southwest of Port Sulphur, was reported to be leaking. The amount discharged has not been determined; the well is rated to produce 5,476 gallons of oil per day. It is unknown when the discharge began.   The source of the discharge has not been secured. Hilcorp, the owner of the well, has contracted ES&H as an oil spill response organization.  ES&H currently has 4 response boats and 13 personnel conducting containment and cleanup operations.  Wild Well Control has been contracted to work on securing the source.   Hilcorp also contracted an overflight of the incident; a Coast Guard helicopter conduced an aerial assessment as well.   Also involved in the response are: Plaquemines Parish Sherriff???€?s Department Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator???€?s Office National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration   The Coast Guard has issued a Safety Marine Information Broadcast to warn boaters in the area of the spill.   The cause of the incident is under investigation [SEP] UPDATE: Response continues for Rattle Snake Bayou oil release U.S. Coast Guard sent this bulletin at 12/10/2018 09:11 PM EST News Release   U.S. Coast Guard 8th District Heartland Contact: 8th District Public Affairs Office: (504) 671-2020 After Hours: (618) 225-9008 Eighth District online newsroom December 10, 2018 UPDATE: Response continues for Rattle Snake Bayou oil release Editors' Note: Click on images to download high resolution version. NEW ORLEANS - The Coast Guard continues to respond to a well discharging a mixture of crude oil, gas, and water near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, Monday.  A Unified Command has been established consisting of the Coast Guard, Hilcorp, and the Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office. Approximately 1,700 feet of hard boom has been deployed to contain the discharging oil, 2,000 feet of absorbent boom to collect it, and 630 gallons of oily water have been recovered so far. Assets being utilized include: Five response and oil recovery vessels Four shoreline clean-up and assessment vessels One drone-capable vessel The Coast Guard and Hilcorp are both conducting aerial assessments of the area.   Wild Well Control is on scene working to secure the source of the discharge. Also involved in the response are: Plaquemines Parish Sherriff's Department Plaquemines Office of Environmental Management Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration Hilcorp Energy has published a claims line for those impacted by the incident: Claims Phone: (337) 216-4311 Claims Fax: (337) 216-4435 The cause of the incident is under investigation.   -USCG- [SEP] News Release   U.S. Coast Guard 8th District Heartland Contact: 8th District Public Affairs Office: (504) 671-2020 After Hours: (618) 225-9008 Eighth District online newsroom UPDATE 3: Response continues for the Lake Washington A10 Well Leak NEW ORLEANS ???€? The Unified Command continues to respond to a well that discharged a mixture of crude oil, gas, and water near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, Sunday. At approximately 10:15 p.m. personnel on a rig barge mechanically plugged the well head permanently securing it. It is estimated that approximately 9,282 gallons of oil was discharged before the well head was controlled. Approximately 13,300 feet of hard boom has been deployed. Approximately 10,080 gallons of oily water mixture has been recovered so far. The Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries is on scene conducting response operations for affected wildlife in the area. To report oiled wildlife sightings, please call LDWF at: (337) 735-8677.   -USCG- [SEP] USCG Press Release. UPDATE 2: Response continues for the Lake Washington A10 Well Leak U.S. Coast Guard sent this bulletin at 12/12/2018 08:04 PM EST News Release   U.S. Coast Guard 8th District Heartland Contact: 8th District Public Affairs Office: (504) 671-2020 After Hours: (618) 225-9008 Eighth District online newsroom UPDATE 2: Response continues for the Lake Washington A10 Well Leak Editors' Note: Click on images to download high resolution version. NEW ORLEANS ???€? A Unified Command consisting of the Coast Guard, Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator???€?s Office and Hilcorp Energy continues to respond to a well that discharged a mixture of crude oil, gas, and water near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, Wednesday. The Coast Guard and Hilcorp are both conducting aerial assessments of the area. Source control crews have controlled the leak, and continue to work to repair the well in attempt to prevent further discharging. Approximately 11,000 feet of hard boom has been deployed. Approximately 4,830 gallons of oily water mixture have been recovered so far. There are 116 oil spill response personnel on scene conducting containment and clean-up operations. Assets being utilized include: Ten response vessels Five work boats Ten marco skimming vessels Two drum skimmers Ten airboats Three drone packages Also involved in the response are: Plaquemines Parish Sherriff's Department Plaquemines Office of Environmental Management Environmental Safety and Health Forefront Emergency Management OMI Environmental Solutions Coast Guard Gulf Strike Team Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration Birds were observed in the affected area but were not able to be captured. The Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries is conducting wildlife response operations. Hilcorp Energy has published a claims line for those impacted by the incident: Claims Phone: (337) 216-4311 Claims Fax: (337) 216-4435   -USCG- [SEP] Coast Guard responding to oil discharge in Rattle Snake Bayou U.S. Coast Guard sent this bulletin at 12/09/2018 05:48 PM EST News Release   U.S. Coast Guard 8th District Heartland Contact: 8th District Public Affairs Office: (504) 671-2020 After Hours: (618) 225-9008 Eighth District online newsroom December 9, 2018 Coast Guard responding to oil discharge in Rattle Snake Bayou   Editor's Note: For a high resolution version, click on the photo. NEW ORLEANS ???€? The Coast Guard is responding to an oil discharge near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, Sunday.  Watchstanders at Coast Guard Sector New Orleans received a report from the National Response Center that a crude oil well in Rattle Snake Bayou, southwest of Port Sulphur, was reported to be leaking. The amount discharged has not been determined; the well is rated to produce 5,476 gallons of oil per day. It is unknown when the discharge began. The source of the discharge has not been secured. Hilcorp, the owner of the well, has contracted ES&H as an oil spill response organization. ES&H currently has 4 response boats and 13 personnel conducting containment and cleanup operations. Wild Well Control has been contracted to work on securing the source.   Hilcorp also contracted an overflight of the incident; a Coast Guard helicopter conducted an aerial assessment as well.  Also involved in the response are: Plaquemines Parish Sherriff???€?s Department Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator???€?s Office National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration The Coast Guard has issued a Safety Marine Information Broadcast to inform boaters in the area of the spill. The cause of the incident is under investigation.
On the evening of November 29, 2018, USCG Detroit notified SSC of a ruptured natural gas pipeline located along the southwestern side of the MacArthur Bridge. The DTE gas main is 6" in diameter and has a max discharge potential of 1,000,000 cubic feet over a 4-5 hour period. USCG is requesting plume modeling and fate and effects.
This hotline was opened to capture response information for Hurricane Michael.  USCG Mobile has set Port Condition X Ray for all ports and the GIWW from Gulfport to Port Panama City. At 1800c, Port condition Yankee will be put in place for all these areas as well.
On October 2, 2018 at 08:45 ET the F/V San Diego shrimping vessel grounded on a jetty approximately 7 miles NW of Key West.  The USCG contacted the NOAA SSC requesting a fate & transport for potential discharge of 3000 gallons of marine diesel.
Florence become a major hurricane on Monday September 10.  Landfall is expected near the Cape Fear/Wilmington, NC area later in the week.  NWS expects significant storm surge, elevated wind speeds, heavy rains, flooding, high surf and dangerous rip currents.  This hotline was opened to capture information about the storm. [SEP] Photo Release   Oct. 10, 2018 U.S. Coast Guard Hurricane Florence Response Contact: ESF-10 Unified Command Joint Information Center (757) 633-2607 Hurricane Florence online newsroom Unified Command begins removing  pollution from vessels in wake of Hurricane Florence (update #2)     Editor???€?s note: media interested in observing assessment or recovery operations along the North Carolina coast can contact the ESF-10 Joint Information Center at (757) 633-2607. FAYETTEVILLE, N.C. ???€? Response crews from Emergency Support Function #10 (ESF #10) North Carolina Unified Command began operations to remove pollution from vessels sunk or displaced by Hurricane Florence, Friday. ???€?We???€?re pleased to see how many owners have already taken action to recover their displaced vessels and encourage more to do so,???€? said Capt. David O???€?Neal, N.C. Wildlife Resource Commission. ???€?Our officers will help U.S. Coast Guard members remove the threat of pollution from remaining vessels, but final responsibility for removing the vessel falls to the registered owner.???€? As of Oct. 9, 2018, ESF-10 Pollution Assessment Teams have assessed over 540 total targets  impacted by Hurricane Florence. There are a total of 205 vessels and 05 containers that still need action to be taken to properly mitigate the pollution threat. These numbers are subject to change as owners salvage their vessels and additional vessels are discovered in the affected areas. Owners of storm-impacted vessels can contact the Unified Command at (757) 355-1042 to report their salvage plan and ensure they are following the best management practices to protect the environment. Owners should be prepared to provide their name, phone number, vessel registration number, and the reference number listed on the sticker placed on their vessel.   Any displaced or adrift containers larger than 55 gallons (approximately two feet wide by three feet tall) should be reported to the the National Response Center at (800) 424-8802. Any containers smaller than 55 gallons should be reported to the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality or local municipal waste facilities. The Unified Command consists of Capt. David O???€?Neal, North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission (WRC) On-Scene Coordinator and U.S. Coast Guard Cmdr. Raymond Negron serving as Federal On-Scene Coordinator Representative. ESF-10 is the framework coordinating federal and state agency response to actual or potential oil spills or hazardous material releases in the FEMA designated counties. Assisting agencies, including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality are contributing expertise and experience to the assessment efforts. For more information regarding Regulatory Requirements and Best Management Practices for vessel removal, please click on the link below. https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0?ui=2&ik=57199bd96d&attid=0.1&permmsgid=msg-f:1613684174786031796&th=1664f53511ca70b4&view=att&disp=safe&realattid=f_jmz2lgpr0   -USCG- [SEP] A vessel displaced onto a shallow marsh is rigged to have oily-water pumped out of its bilge and transferred to a temporary storage container on an environmental workboat staged at a deeper location (not pictured), Atlantic Beach, N.C., Sunday, Oct. 14, 2018. The Emergency Support Function-10 Unified Command, made up of the U.S. Coast Guard and the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission, collaborated with assisting agencies like the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality, and the Environmental Protection Agency for best practices to tackle pollution threats in environmentally-sensitive areas after Hurricane Florence. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Brandon Hillard) [SEP] The following is available at:  https://content.govdelivery.com/accounts/USDHSCG/bulletins/214ba33   Photo Release   Oct. 17, 2018 U.S. Coast Guard Hurricane Florence Response Contact: ESF-10 Unified Command Joint Information Center Fayetteville, N.C.: (757) 633-2607 ESF10Florence@gmail.com Hurricane Florence online newsroom PHOTO RELEASE: Coast Guard, Federal and State partners mitigate pollution in Carteret County, N.C. Editors' Note: Click on images to download high resolution version. ATLANTIC BEACH, N.C. ???€? The Emergency Support Function-10 Unified Command, comprised of the U.S. Coast Guard and the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission, coordinated efforts with multiple assisting agencies to safely remove pollution from a displaced vessel grounded on a fragile estuarine ecosystem in Carteret County, N.C., Sunday, Oct. 14, 2018.  Many of these sensitive areas require federal and state agencies to share expertise and best practices in order to mitigate potential pollution threats to habitats such as wetlands, oyster beds, and seagrass beds, without harming the environment and the wildlife that they harbor.  "It is clear that North Carolina is a special place with important coastal habitats, protected species and fishery resources," said Jordan Stout, a senior scientific support coordinator with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). "Engaging the State???€?s environmental agencies and local experts to provide operationally-focused protective guidance are critical in helping us minimize impacts to these important resources, while effectively removing pollutants from sunken, grounded, and displaced vessels." Materials from vessels that pose a threat to the environment include discharged fuel such as gasoline or diesel, oil, marine batteries, flares, fire extinguishers, and chemical containers. NOAA, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality are just some of the assisting agencies helping to mitigate pollution threats in environmentally-sensitive areas within disaster-declared counties.
U.S. Navy SUPSALV has contacted the NOAA SSC for the Pacific Islands to request trajectory support in the event of an oil release during planned operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands.  The  700-foot German heavy cruiser sank in December 1946 but still contains fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Support Team is putting together information on the likely oil trajectory in the event of a release, as well as information on chemistry and expected persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil . [SEP] US Navy SupSalv article following completion of salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
On the morning of June 29th, 2018, T/V Chem Norma grounded between Iriquois and Messena in Canadian waters. It is carrying 11 Metric Tons on Alkylated Arylamine and an unknown quantity of fuel and oil. There are no reports of pollution or discharges. Sector Buffalo contacted SSC and requested fate and effects of Alkylated Arylamine.
On April 2, 2018, approximately 400 gallons of dielectric fluid was released from a power cable crossing the Straits of Mackinac, MI. The source spill site is approximately 400 feet offshore and covered in patchy ice. The fluid could not be secured due to the possibility of water intrusion into the cable, but the flow has been reduced to 10 gallons an hour. USCG Sault Ste. Marie has requested trajectory and resources at risk. [SEP] Final cables secured response concludes on Straits of Mackinac [SEP] ATC cables capped, sealed in Straights of Mackinac, response continues [SEP] Photo Release Unified Command completes ROV underwater imagery assessment of utility cable is Straits of Mackinac [SEP] News Release   April 3, 2018 U.S. Coast Guard 9th District Great Lakes Contact: Lt. j.g. Sean Murphy Office: (906) 635-3223 9th District online newsroom U.S. Coast Guard, partner agencies respond to utility line leak in Straits of Mackinac SAULT STE MARIE, Mich. ???€? The Coast Guard, in coordination with local, state and federal partners, is working with the American Transmission Company to respond to a leak from a utility line in the Straits of Mackinac, approximately two miles west of the Mackinac Bridge. The Coast Guard received notification that an electrical line cased with mineral oil might be leaking into the Straits of Mackinac yesterday afternoon. Upon notification, Coast Guard crews traveled to the area to investigate, and a Coast Guard helicopter crew conducted an overflight but neither detected an oil sheen. The utility line???€?s owner, the American Transmission Company, determined that there is a leak in the utility line that crosses the Straits of Mackinac, approximately 12,000 to 15,000 feet off shore. The leaking product is composed predominately of mineral oil which is used to insulate the utility line. American Transmission Company has taken action to control the leak including securing the utility line which is currently inoperable. There is no impact to power supply to the local communities. The cause of the leak is currently under investigation. Coast Guard Sector Sault Sainte Marie personnel are working with the Environmental Protection Agency, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Fish and Wildlife, local tribes, and county emergency managers to oversee the pollution response. ???€?Safety of the public and our responders is our top priority," said Captain Marko Broz, U.S. Coast Guard Federal On Scene Coordinator. "We are further committed to protecting the environment and ensuring a proactive response.???€? ???€?The DEQ is working closely with the American Transmission Company and federal, state, local, and tribal partners to coordinate an efficient response, protect the natural resources of the Great Lakes, and ensure public health and safety,???€? said Scott Schaefer of Michigan DEQ. Coast Guard responders will remain on scene and continue to coordinate with partner agencies and the American Transmission Company in response to the spill. For more information contact Lt. j.g. Sean Murphy at (906) 635-3223 or sean.v.murphy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] MEDIA ADVISORY: Unified Command to update media on Straits of Mackinac cable leak [SEP] Video Release ROV deployed to survey underwater cables in Straits of Mackinac [SEP] Photo Release Unified Command releases underwater imagery from ROV in Straits of Mackinac [SEP] Unified Command approves plan to cap, seal severed utility cables
USCG Sector Maryland NCR notified the NOAA SSC that four empty rail cars had blown off the Susquehanna River Bridge and into the river on Friday, 2 March, 2018 during the nor'easter. USCG overseeing salvage efforts and requested an updated weather report.
On February 10, 2018, the USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the NOAA SSC regarding a HFO discharge to the Mississippi River at MM 145 that occurred at the Pin Oak Terminals, Mt. Airy, LA.  Initial response has been hampered by fog.  The USCG Sector New Orleans Incident Management Division (IMD) has arranged with AIRSTA NOLA for an overflight once the fog lifts.  USCG requested a trajectory analysis.
On October 11, 2107, the USCG Sector Honolulu contacted the NOAA's ERD Oceanographer on Duty to report that a vessel, the F/V Pacific Paradise, was aground 400 yards from the Outrigger Canoe Club in Waikiki. The USCG requested a trajectory for a potential release of 8,000 gallons of diesel fuel. The vessel also has 50 gallons of lube oil on board. [SEP] News Release Oct. 20, 2017 U.S. Coast Guard 14th District Hawaii and the Pacific Contact: 14th District Public Affairs Office: (808) 535-3230 After Hours: (808) 341-9849 Responders unsuccessful in removing grounded fishing vessel off Honolulu HONOLULU ???€? Responders were unsuccessful in removing the grounded 79-foot fishing vessel Pacific Paradise off Waikiki, Friday. Marine salvage company Cates International crews utilized a tug with 8???€? plasma towline and chain from both the bow and stern of the fishing vessel in the attempt to break it free from the coral reef. ???€?Salvage teams attempted various removal procedures on both on the bow and stern and although the vessel had movement during the process, it remains aground,???€? said Capt. Michael Long, commander, Coast Guard Sector Honolulu and captain of the port. ???€?Our Coast Guard teams will reassess with all our partners this weekend to prepare future removal plans. We understand the sense of urgency to remove this vessel from the reef and are working diligently to ensure this is done as quickly and as safely as possible.???€? Approximately 1,500 gallons of diesel remains on board and all fuel tanks have been plugged. A safety zone remains in effect around the vessel extending out 500 yards in all directions. The public is asked to remain clear of the safety zone to prevent injury or impact to operations. The public is strongly urged to not attempt to approach the vessel. A salvage team was able to approach the vessel for the first time post fire, Wednesday to survey the damage, assess the hull and inspect for pollution. The fishing vessel was prepped Thursday in an attempt to be towed the following day. The vessel remained grounded for several days despite several initial attempts to tow it from the reef located off Waikiki???€?s Kaimana Beach during favorable tides. Partners in the effort include personnel in several divisions of the Department of Land and Natural Resources, Department of Health, the responsible party, commercial salvors and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. No marine mammals have been affected during the duration of this incident. The Pacific Paradise is a U.S.-flagged vessel and part of the Hawaii longline fishing fleet homeported in Honolulu. Coast Guard response and Honolulu Fire Department crews rescued the master and 19 fishermen from the vessel late night Oct. 10, following reports that the vessel grounded off Diamond Head near Kaimana Beach. Those crewmen were released to U.S. Customs and Border Protection. The cause of the grounding remains under investigation. [SEP] Update: State begins reef damage assessment, final preps being made to remove Pacific Paradise from Kaimana Beach, Oahu HONOLULU ???€? A team from the State of Hawaii is beginning their reef damage assessment Wednesday as final preparations are made by responders in advance of another attempt to remove the 79-foot fishing vessel Pacific Paradise Friday or Saturday depending on the weather. Once refloat operations begin, they will continue throughout the day and night for 24 to 48 hours. Generators, dewatering pumps, and light stands may be operated throughout the night during the removal operations. A team of six divers from the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural resources is assessing the reef as responders finish welding, patching and prepping interior spaces and towing attachments aboard the grounded vessel. Monday and Tuesday the team worked on the towing bridal and continued assessments and mending in interior spaces. During the course of this work they located and patched an 18-inch crack in a forward bulkhead and pumped an estimated 1,380 gallons of an oily water mix out of the port tank, further reducing the potential pollution threat. Sheening was noted by the responders, sorbent pads were applied however the sheen was non-recoverable and quickly moved off shore before dissipating. In the initial days of the response about two-thirds of the fuel was removed. Despite the removal of 900 gallons of oily water mix Tuesday responders believe nearly 1,500 gallons of fuel could be on the vessel. Precautionary measures are already in place to mitigate any release of fuel should one occur during final preparations or the removal operations. Oil spill response equipment is aboard the JW Barnes work vessel and pre-staged at the Waikiki Aquarium. Absorbent materials, containment booms, absorbent pads, drums and personnel protective equipment are available for use. A monk seal was seen on the beach Tuesday, but was in no danger and remained away from the vessel. Responders immediately notified NOAA's Marine Mammal Response Team coordinator and the team continues to remain on standby to address any marine mammal needs should they arise. "We are refloating the vessel, to get it off the reef and into deeper water," said Todd Duke from Resolve Marine Group. "It is a wrecked vessel and is very dangerous. We ask that the public gives us a wide berth to operate and go about our job safely. There is still some diesel fuel on board in tanks we cannot safely access without compromising the vessel further. We have personnel and oil response equipment pre-staged, in the event a spill does occur we have the means to respond and mitigate it." The responders will start the removal operations by further dewatering spaces aboard the vessel and pumping air into the compartments of the Pacific Paradise. The engineroom of the fishing vessel will also be filled with foam to add additional buoyancy. This foam is non-toxic and similar to what is used in industrial freezers or surfboards. Once the Pacific Paradise becomes buoyant, the responders will continue to run dewatering pumps as they attempt to tow the fishing vessel off the reef and take it out to the EPA-approved disposal site 13 miles south of Oahu where it will be sunk. A safety zone remains in effect around the vessel extending out 500 yards in all directions. The public is asked to remain clear of the safety zone to prevent injury or impact to operations. More information will be issued once removal operations commence and progress throughout the weekend. -USCG- [SEP] News Release Dec. 7, 2017 U.S. Coast Guard 14th District Hawaii and the Pacific Contact: 14th District Public Affairs Office: (808) 535-3230 After Hours: (808) 341-9849 Imagery Available: Pacific Paradise successfully removed from reef off Oahu Editors Note: Click on images to video or download high resolution video and photos or visit the Feature Page for the response: https://www.dvidshub.net/feature/PacificParadise HONOLULU ???€? The grounded Pacific Paradise was successfully removed from the reef off Kaimana BeachThursday. The State of Hawaii???€?s Department of Land and Natural Resources will assume the lead as the coordinating agency to work with the owner of the Pacific Paradise to conduct cleanup of the wreck site as the pollution threat has been removed. The state will assess any damage done to the reef and facilitate the next step in mitigating the impacts and rehabilitating the reef. ???€?This response has been long and challenging, but the professionalism and expertise of the crews that came together was nothing short of impressive???€?, said Capt. Michael Long, captain of the port and commander U.S. Coast Guard Sector Honolulu. We appreciate the patience and support of the public, the diligence and persistence of our partners and are grateful the Pacific Paradise was safely removed.???€? Suzanne Case, chair of the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources, expressed her sincere appreciation to everyone involved for their patience, persistence and care in getting the Pacific Paradise removed from the reef successfully and safely. Case said, "These efforts are complex, and with the addition of unpredictable ocean conditions, the position, size and weight of the ship on the reef, and its proximity to one of Hawaii's most populated beach areas, it was important that we all worked together to remove the ship while minimizing risk to people and to the environment. DLNR is conducting a full assessment of the reef and any associated natural resource damage that occurred during the event.???€? Response crews refloated the Pacific Paradise Wednesday and moved the vessel about 600 feet into the sandy channel before losing the tide. Crews conducted additional work to the vessel late in the day to prepare for the refloat and tow Thursday. That effort was ultimately successful in fully removing the vessel at 7:15 a.m. on the high tide using the tug Pi???€?ilani. Just over a mile offshore the tow was switched over to the tug American Contender for the transit out to the EPA-approved disposal site 13 miles south of Oahu in federal waters. The responders are now in the process of sinking the Pacific Paradise in nearly 1,800 feet of water, which may take several hours. During the operation to refloat and
On July 10, 2017, the NOAA SSC was notified by the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) of an anomaly on satellite images in Nantucket Sound that may be from oil sheen from one of several historic wrecks in the region. [SEP] Information from the LRAUV mission can be seen near real-time on a publicly accessible website.  1. Once on the website, click the "Dash4" tab.  2. Click the + button to select a vehicle. Click on the word "polaris" to access the log and data.  3. The "log" tab shows actions taken by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners.  4. Click on the "data" tab to see data that is being gathered and in the various formats it is being displayed and summarized. Some of this data is being incorporated and displayed in ERMA. [SEP] Data from this mission can be retrieved online at https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ [SEP] Information and situation updates can be viewed here on ERMA. [SEP] Here is additional information on WHOI's LRAUV program for under-ice oil spill detection. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) long-range autonomous underwater vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene at the Wreck 1487 site in the early hours of 24 Jan 2022. The site is approximately 70 nm south of Nantucket. The USCG assisted WHOI in launching the LRAUV to save transit time and battery power. After launch, several calibration tests were completed, and then it took a few days for the LRAUV to transit to the research site. Durign the trip, WHOI identified, but was able to isolate, and ground fault error that could have potentially jeopardized its mission.  Once on scene, the LRAUV began grid pattern searches through the area looking to identify or "sniff out" hydrocarbons from the leaking wreck site.  Early in the morning of 24 Jan, a NESDIS update from satellite Sentinel 1A identified an oil sheen NE of the site. The information was shared with WHOI who, in response, is moving the LRAUV into the area where the sheen was identified.  WHOI has live information that is being shared through a website so the public can see mission information and data that is being gathered. Some of that information is also being posted, as available, on ERMA. Detailed information on accessing the WHOI website and mission data will be shared in a separate post. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) is sending a Long Range Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (LRAUV) designed to detect potential oil spills on a test run to a known sunken vessel that is actively leaking. The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will travel to a known shipwreck labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south of Nantucket, to test the sensitivity of an optical sensor and then see how well WHOI???€?s adaptive mission survey can sniff out and map out an oil plume.  The frequently (potentially constantly) leaking wreck will hopefully serve as a real-world proxy.  Data will be collected from the following sensors: Up/down 1200 kHz ADCP (RDI) SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck Seabird glider payload CTD with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic artificial radiation More specifically, data also includes and is gathered in the following manner: SeaOWL UV-A ???€? CHL, FDOM, and Optical backscatter (OBS) CTD ???€? Conductivity, Water Temp, and Depth DO Optode ???€? DO Concentration and DO Saturation Merged data streams calibrated to common sampling rate of 1/second All sensor data retrieved as a .csv file (lat/lon/depth) AUV Fluorometry products OBS as a function of FDOM, 3D OBS/FDOM, 3D data model Data transfer:  Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time:  Merged data stream ~15 minutes NOAA has coordinated and provided background information to WHOI to help the group prepare for and plan their mission. NESDIS has shared satellite imagery from the leaking source, which was also analyzed through ERMA to identify a likely location for the wreck. ORR has shared RULET background information, ocean current information, and helped with coordination between WHOI and USCG Sector Southeastern New England. The USCG will be following the mission and studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Ocean Prediction Center is providing detailed specific on-site offshore weather forecasts for the area. The mission is planned to commence on the morning of Jan 20. It is likely that the transit time for the LRAUV to arrive on site will be approximately 3 days. Then the LRAUV will stay on site for 7-10 days before returning to land. Daily operational briefs including staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are scheduled for the duration of the mission. Information and data gathered during the mission will be displayed in ERMA and updates will be provided in ResponseLink.
On April 7, 2017, the USCG Sector San Francisco contacted the NOAA SSC to report that a 112’ x 52’ deck barge and crane had capsized and sunk around midnight, just east of Yerba Buena Island in San Francisco Bay.  The barge and crane reportedly had roughly 4,000 gallons of diesel and 300 gallons of hydraulic fluid on-board at the time of sinking.  The crane and barge had been working on the BART (Bay Area Rapid Transit) subway tube under the Bay prior to the sinking, but BART officials have reported no known damage to the BART transit system.  Sector San Francisco requested oil fate & trajectory support.
On January 19, 2017 the USCG discovered sheening from a combined stormwater/sewerage outfall (CSO) associated with the New Haven Terminal.  The oil leaked into the CSO from the soil.  Leak continues but is controlled and contained.  The NOAA SSC was contacted on Friday afternoon for advice via telephone.
NOAA RRT8 rep received notification of the Ash Coulee Creek oil spill in western North Dakota. No request for support.  On 15 DEC, RRT notified of an insitu burn to be conducted on site. Initiating hotline as a placeholder for information on the case due to use of ISB inland and capturing any lessons learned.
On November 16, 2016, the 36 foot pleasure craft LUCIA collided with a 40 foot fishing vessel and promptly sank.  The event happened 12.5 miles SE of Block Island, RI in 200 feet of water.  All souls were rescued by the fishing vessel which experience no major damage.  The LUCIA went down with 175 gallons of diesel fuel on-board.  The UCSG Sec. Southeast New England requested fate and transport information from the NOAA SSC.
On October 31, 2016 at 4:56 p.m. EDT the National Response Center received a report of a 168,000 gallon (4,000 barrel) discharge of gasoline from a 36” steel transmission pipeline. The incident was discovered in Helena, Alabama at 2:55 p.m. CDT. The pipeline was reportedly struck by a third party contractor resulting in the discharge.
On October 24, 2016, the USCG Sector Columbia River notified NOAA ERD that the F/V Pacific Rim is grounded on a sand bar just south of the Westport Marina in Grays Harbor, WA.  The 60-foot vessel sank at approximately 0400 yesterday and is reported to be carrying 250 gallons of diesel fuel.  No oil release has been observed but trajectory support was requested in the event of a release.
On October 13, 2016, ERD was notified of a grounded sailboat at Sand Point, south of Cape Alava, on the Olympic Coast of Washington State.  The vessel grounded on October 8, 2016.  Three persons on board were rescued.  The vessel is reported to have 60 gallons of diesel and multiple small gasoline tanks.  Items that could be moved have been relocated above the high tide line.  Salvage/wreck removal is pending.Global Diving and Salvage, POC Katy Stewart, contracted to salvage.  Global visited the site Monday morning, 10/17.  We expect to hear a field report and development of a salvage plan based on current condition of the wreck.  No word yet on condition of on-board fuel tank and contents, estimated at 60 gal. [SEP] Weather claims two sailboats off coast; Coast Guard rescues crews from ocean by KOMO Staff Friday, October 7th 2016 LA PUSH, Wash. -- The Coast Guard had to rescue crews from two sailboats Thursday night after they were beset by 20-foot seas and wind gusts of up to 50 mph. One sailboat was taking on water and was abandoned. Three people aboard had to jump in the water to be picked up by a Coast Guard boat. The operator of the second had to be rescued by a Coast Guard swimmer after he abandoned ship when the boat lost its mast. The people on both boats got to safe harbor and were not injured. The Coast Guard got a report that the 45-foot Soteria, which had three people aboard, was taking on water 40 miles northwest of Grays Harbor. A helicopter was launched from Astoria, Oregon. And 47-foot motor life boats were launched from Astoria and La Push. The sailboat didn't have proper safety gear, so the helicopter had to leave and return with survival suits, which it lowered to Coast Guard crews in boats. The three people got on survival suits, got in the water and were picked up by the Coast Guard boats. They were taken to Neah Bay. The Soteria was abandoned and is adrift along the coast. In the second rescue, the 39-foot Grace was caught in weather and was disoriented. The Coast Guard got the vessel headed toward a safe harbor but stayed in radio communication. The Grace lost its mast in the storm and couldn't navigate. Coast Guard decided to have the sailboat anchor and have the man who was sailing it alone to put on a survival suit and abandon ship. A 52-foot boat from Grays Harbor launched, and a Coast Guard swimmer rescued the sailor after he was struggling in heavy seas. The sailor and Coast Guard returned to Grays Harbor. The Coast Guard said the rescues underscore the need for mariners to be prepared for storms. "Both of these cases illustrate how extremely important it is to not only check weather conditions before you go out, but to also have the proper safety gear on your vessel," said Lt. J.g. Isaac Yates of Sector Columbia Center's Command Center. "At a minimum, people operating on the open ocean should have proper life jackets, immersion suits, a form of communication such as a VHF radio, signaling devices and an electronic position indicating beacon. Given the real potential for injury or death in these situations, we are all very fortunate to have met such a positive outcome."
On September 8, 2016, the USCG Sector Columbia River notified the NOAA SSC for the Northwest that a 70+ foot steel hulled fishing vessel, the F/V TRINITY, grounded at approximately 0300 on Copalis Beach, WA. The vessel is reported to be carrying 3000 gallons of diesel, but there has been no release. Tugs are en route to try to free the vessel.  NOAA trustees have been notified.
In the early morning hours of 04-SEP-2016, the paddle-wheeler SPIRIT OF SACRAMENTO was reportedly taking on water in False River portion of the San Joaquin River Delta.  All persons on board disembarked safely, but by sunrise the vessel had capsized, grounded and was producing a light sheen.   USCG Sector San Francisco contacted their NOAA SSC to request a spot weather forecast and tidal current estimates for the vessel location to support dive assessment.  A trajectory may also be requested prior to fuel removal operations.
On September 4, 2016, the USCG Sector Upper Mississippi River notified the NOAA SSC of incident involving loss of marine diesel from the UTV Zeus in the vicinity of Davenport, Iowa. The vessel was assisting a grounded anhydrous ammonia barge around 12 AM on 4 SEPT when it grounded and sustained damage to the port fuel tank. The  USCG requesting potential trajectory of worst case discharge of fuel from UTV and, or discharge from anhydrous ammonia barge (4,800 tons).
On August 10, 2016, MSU Port Arthur notified NOAA SSC of a 50 bbl crude oil discharge from a production pipeline in JD Murphree Wildlife Management Area (WMA).  Source is secure, discharged oil is in an impoundment, and response assets have been mobilized.  Resources at Risk information was requested and has been provided.
On July 28, 2016, the pleasure craft Outlaw,a 40-ft aluminum hulled vessel, grounded in Nina Cove (54-49.3N, 132-40.3W), on the southeast corner of Long Island, Alaska. 7 People were rescued off the vessel and transferred to USCG Station Ketchikan.  USCG Marine Safety Detachment Ketchikan reports 410 gallons of diesel and approximately 20 gallons of hydraulic oil onboard. The Coast Guard is requesting a Resources at Risk report.
On 26-Jul-2016, the USCG reported that the FV Alaska Juris, a 218' fish catcher/processor is sinking due to an unknown cause.  The vessel has 45 POB on board and a USCG SAR is in progress.  There is a potential of 87,276 gallons of diesel on board.  Sector Anchorage has requested a fates analysis and trajectory for the fuels.
On 22-JUL-2016, the FV Carmelina, a fiberglass hull purse seiner, capsized and overturned in Shelikof Strait near Dry Bay, Alaska. All POB rescued by "Good Sam" vessel SPARTAN. Estimate of fuel on board is 250 gallons diesel (with other assoc. oils). No sheen observed at the time of rescue. Vessel is carrying approximately 3000 lbs of fish. Vessels nets were fully deployed at the time of capsize. USCG is requesting a Resource at Risk report.
On July 25, 2016 the NOAA RRO was contacted by USCG Sector New Orleans regarding a spill of 30-100bbl of Louisiana Sweet Crude oil.  The Incident occurred around midnight on July 24, 2016.  The reported cause of the spill is a valve failure within the pipeline.  The source is secure, and ES&H is on scene with ~2,500ft of boom. The USCG has requested trajectory and resources at risk from NOAA.
On 23-Jul-2016, the FV Ambition suffered a breach to the lazarette hold and began taking on water in the vicinity of False Pass, AK.  The vessel has a potential of 3000 gallons of diesel onboard. All POB have been rescued by good Samaritan vessel.  FV Ambition is submerged and sheening.  USCG is requesting a spot forecast and trajectory and fates analysis.
On July 22, 2016, the USCG Marine Safety Unit in Houma, LA,  notified the NOAA SSC about a pipeline leak in Hackberry Bay, LA.  The pipeline is believed to be carrying crude oil, volume released and potential unknown at this point, but line has been shut in (RP Swift Energy). Preliminary Sheen report was dark oil 15 miles x 200 yards. Coast Guard aerial assets and surface team will be on-site this evening, OSROs enroute. Fate, trajectory, and resources at risk requested and in process.
On 20-JULY-2016, a whale watch boat operating outside Moss Landing Harbor, CA reported two mystery sheens;  one was “football field-sized” and the other smaller.  USCG Sector San Francisco contacted their NOAA SSC to relay the report and to request trajectory support to determine if the sheens are likely to enter Moss Landing and/or threaten nearby shorelines.
On July 19, 2016, the USCG requested SSC assistance with the grounding of the F/V TATY Z on Amlia Island, AK.  The operator estimates that there is 1500 gallons of diesel and 20 gallons of lube oil on board. The vessel also has approximately 4,500 lbs. of Halibut on board. USCG has requested NOAA assistance regarding shoreline type at the grounding location.
On July 11, 2016, severe weather and flooding destroyed much of the Saxon Harbor Marina in Iron County, Wisconsin.  A total of 85 boats have been damaged or destroyed with 20 of those washing up on the Lake Superior shoreline and 6 boats still unaccounted for.  USCG reports very turbid water and debris 3 to 6 miles offshore.  No visible sheen at this time.  MSU Duluth contacted the NOAA SSC for trajectory and resources at risk support.
On July 12, 2016, the USCG Sector Columbia River contacted NOAA ERD for trajectory support for potential release from the F/V Mickey Sue, hard aground in Tillamook Bay, Oregon.  The vessel is reported to contain a potential of 250 gallons of diesel fuel.
On 29 June 2016, the FV Echo, a 30-foot fishing vessel began taking on water and intentionally grounded on the coast of Bristol Bay, 26 miles southwest of Nelson Lagoon. The maximum potential is 210 gallons of diesel; it is estimated that there are 80 gallons onboard.
On June 29, 2016, the Tank Vessel CHEM VENUS was outbound in the Piscataqua River (border of Maine and NH)when it struck a ledge near Goat Island and proceeded to strike 3 moored sailing vessels. No injuries.  No pollution or cargo release has been reported and observations by boat and aircraft confirm no pollution.
On June 29, 2016, the USCG First District Command Center notified NOAA of a dielectric fluid leak in the Hudson River coming from a subsurface electric transmission line.
On June 28, 2016, the NOAA SSC was contacted by USCG Sector Buffalo regarding a mystery sheen along the Lake Ontario shoreline west of Sunset Bay.  Sheen was described as a light petroleum product approximately 1 nautical mile long by 30 yards wide.  USCG requested a trajectory for the sheen.
On June 23, 2016, a fire fighting crew near Ventura, CA, reported a leaking pipeline in Halls canyon, about 3 miles from the coast near Ventura, CA.  The spill was initially estimated at 5000 barrels but was later revised to 600 barrels.  The oil is reportedly contained in a dry gulch and efforts are underway to build a containment berm.
On June 19, 2016, the 44' F/V Chippewa grounded at Cape Pankof on Unimak Island, Alaska. The vessel is holed on its starboard side and could not be pulled free. No sheen has been observed; maximum potential is 1000 gallons diesel. Crew were rescued by good Samaritan vessel and enroute to King Cove.  Resolve Marine has been contacted for salvage.

On June 15, 2016, a USCG Aux. flight reported a 500 yard x 50 ft sheen about 1 nm SE of Owls Head, Maine.  The source was unknown.
On June 14, 2016, the USCG Sector NOLA contacted the NOAA SSC to request a hindcast for a mystery sheen reported in Little Lake, Turtle Bay, Louisiana (Jefferson Parish, NRC# 1150600). Source and responsible party were unknown, but suspected to be a pipeline from one of the facilities located on Turtle Bay. Hindcast and trajectory were provided.
On June 14, 2016, the USCG Sector Hampton Roads notified the NOAA SSC that a Navy MH 60 Seahawk helicopter crashed into the James river about 1.5 miles north of the James river bridge. All 3 occupants were rescued. The aircraft had approximately 400 gallons of JP 5 fuel on board at the time of crash.
On June 13,2016, the USCG MSU Morgan City contacted the NOAA SSC requesting additional information regarding a sheen reported in Mississippi Canyon Block 809.   SSC contacted satellite analyst for additional information, and cross-referenced reports with known facilities in ERMA.  OceanMap reports and map of nearby facilities provided to MSU Morgan City.
On June 3, 2016, the USEPA notified the NOAA SSC that at approximately 12:40pm a Union Pacific unit train carrying Bakken crude oil derailed near the town of Mosier, Oregon, east of Hood River on the Oregon bank of the Columbia River.  Initial information reported was that 2 cars are on fire and no oil has reached the water. EPA responders are en route.  Trustees have been notified.
On June 2, 2016, the USCG contacted the Houston SSC regarding a potential pipeline spill near Spring, TX.  The pipeline is at risk of damage due to flood conditions on Spring Creek and severe weather in the Houston region.  The pipeline has been shutdown and efforts are underway to remove gasoline from the line, but there is currently a potential of 650,000 gallons in the stretch of pipeline at risk.  Spring Creek flows into the San Jacinto River and Lake Houston.  The lake is part of the Houston water supply.  The USCG requested information on potential downstream transport and impacts to water quality.
On May 28, 2016, the USCG Marine Safety Unit in Port Arthur, TX, notified NOAA SSC about a mystery sheen on the Neches River across from the Port of Beaumont.  Discharge was reported to be ~400 gallons of Eagle Ford Shale crude.  Advice on fate and trajectory, was requested and provided.
On May 28, 2016, the USCG Sector Boston notified the NOAA SSC that THE MAJESTY, a dinner cruise ship, ran aground on George's Island near Boston Light, Boston Harbor, MA. Incident occurred at 1924 hours. Vessel had 1900 gallons of diesel fuel on board. An unknown amount of fuel oil has spilled into the water.
On May 27, 2016, the M/V Roger Blough ran around on Gros Cap Reef in Lake Superior, west of Sault Ste. Marie, along the U.S. and Canadian border.  Max potential discharge is 133,141 gallons of number 2 diesel.  USCG Sector Sault Ste. Marie contacted the NOAA SSC requesting trajectory, fate, and effects for the potential release, but no reported pollution at this time.
On May 23, 2016, the USCG Sector Honolulu notified the NOAA SSC for Oceania that a small 4-passenger Cessna aircraft is in the water about 100 yards off the south end of Makaha Beach on the west side of Oahu, Hawaii.  The aircraft is reported to have 50 gallons of Jet A fuel onboard. No oil has been reported released or observed in the water. The aircraft is intact and has been anchored in position. NOAA trustees were notified.
On May 23, 2016, the USCG notified the NOAA SSC that the F/V JAMIE MARIE, grounded a half mile north of the jetty in Ocean Shores, WA.  The 90-foot steel hull fishing vessel is reported to have 4500 gallons of diesel and 30 gallons of hydraulic fuel, as well as 250,000 pounds of fish onboard.  Permission is being sought from WA Department of Ecology to dump the cargo of fish. NOAA trustees have been notified.
On  May 23rd, 2016, the National Weather Service contacted NOAA's Emergency Response Division (ERD) regarding a train car derailment near South Whitley,  Indiana.  The damaged car was carrying molten phenol. The spill rate is unknown, the total amount of phenol in the damaged tank car is unknown.
On May 22, 2016, the USCG Sector NOLA notified the NOAA SSC about a mystery sheen in the vicinity of Viosca Knoll 859 block.  The sheen, reported by third party overflying the area, was described as rainbow, extending 1 mile x 1 miles.
On June 1, 2016, the National Marine Fisheries Service contacted ERD with a request for a hindcast of a whale carcass found near Chatham, MA, on May 5, 2016.
On May 17, 2016, the NOAA SSC was notified by the USCG regarding planned abandoned derelict vessel removals in vicinity of Apalachicola River. Two vessels were identified as targets for removal and others in area are being assessed.
On May 13, 2016, the NOAA SSC was contacted by the USCG after a USCG Auxiliary flight reported a fuel oil slick off Pemaquid Point (near Boothbay Harbor) in Maine.  The footprint was 50x150 yards, about 3 nautical miles off the coast.  Spill source is unknown and the location does not match any legacy sunken vessels from the NOAA Resources and Undersea Threats (RUST) database.
On May 8, 2016, USCG Sector San Francisco contacted the SSC to relay two separate (but nearby) sheen reports offshore of Bolinas CA.  The first sheen report from a charter fishing vessel was of a 1 mile x 100 yd rainbow sheen at 0930 hrs, but no orientation description.  The second report from the Tug Arthur Brusco was of a N/S oriented sheen approximately 12 NM from the earlier report and within the vessel Traffic Separation Scheme outside the entrance to San Francisco Bay.  USCG requested a hindcast trajectory to determine if the two sheen reports might be related and to narrow down the potential source(s).
On May 6, 2016, A military jet crashed off Wrightsville Beach, NC at 4:45pm. USCG Sector North Carolina notified NOAA SSC at 7:45 pm. Aircraft reported to have 1600 gallons of JP-5 on board. USCG requested trajectory.
On April 27, 2016, the USCG Sector New Orleans (Sec NOLA) contacted the NOAA Regional Response Officer (RRO) regarding the grounding of motor vessel (M/V) SHELF VENTURE in Baptiste Collette, LA. The vessel sustained a 8ft by 3in gash on its port side, damaging the port fuel tank. The USCG determined that the contents of the tank, approximately 1000 gallons of diesel, had discharged into the Baptiste Collette. The USCG has requested a trajectory as well as a resources at risk.
On April 20, 2016, USCG Sector NOLA notified the NOAA SSC of a sinking barge containing crude oil at MM 92.6 on the Lower Mississippi River.  Barge has a capacity of 25,000 bbls.  SSC has provided trajectory based on river flow estimates, and fate analysis for several types of crude oils.
On April 15, 2016, USCG Honolulu notified the NOAA SSC for Oceania that the F/V No. 1 JI HYUN has grounded on the southwest side of Aunuu Island in American Samoa.  The vessel is reported to have 3,000 gallons of diesel on board. No oil has been released to the environment at this time. USCG requested trajectory support in the event of a release.
On April 2, 2016, the 37-foot F/V Volga ran aground in El Dorado Narrows on the Kenai Peninsula, Alaska.   Vessel has 2 ft long hole and crack under waterline which caused flooding in the engine room. There is approximately 100 gallons of diesel and 500lbs of catch on board. USCG has requested resources at risk and a Section 7 consultation
On April 4, 2016 a fishing boat reported three 100yd x 100yd mystery sheens in the area the Isle of Shoals, New Hampshire. Sector Northern New England requested NOAA to hindcast sheens in order to determine the origin of the sheen.
On March 25, 2016, USCG Sector NOLA notified the NOAA SSC about an estimated 2 bbl leak of crude oil from a Texas Petroleum Investment Company (TPIC) pipeline in the Delta National Wildlife Refuge.  Source is secure, OSROs are on-site, and discharged oil is contained by boom in a dead end canal.
On March 24, 2016, USCG Sector Astoria notified the NOAA SSC of a grounded fishing vessel in Coos Bay, OR with 30,000 pounds of fish, 3200 gallons of diesel, and 300 gallons of lube oil. The incident occurred on Wednesday March 23rd at approximately 0800. Three individuals were rescued from the water, one is still missing. USCG requested scientific support for salvage operations.
On Saturday, March 12, 2016 a tug and barge collided off Tarry Town along the Hudson River in the vicinity of the Tappan Zee Bridge.  The plan is to raise the tug on Tuesday, March 22, 2016 and it is estimated that 2500 gallons of diesel fuel is still on board the tug.
During an overflight on March 16, 2016, USCG Sector North Bend, OR, discovered a 26-30 foot partial fishing vessel roughly 10 miles offshore of Gold Beach, OR that is believed to be Japanese tsunami marine debris. No fuel is believed to be on-board the vessel, but USCG attached a Self-Locating Datum Marker Buoy (SLDMB) to track the debris in the event it poses a hazard to navigation and/or comes ashore.
On April 16, 2016, the NOAA RRO was contacted by Sector New Orleans about a 2 mile long mystery sheen located in the vicinity of Main Pass.  This is a notification only; no other assistance is requested at this time.
Om March 10, 2016, the USCG Sector Puget Sound notified the NOAA SSC for the Northwest that the 57-foot F/V BERGEN grounded in Bellingham Bay, WA, with an estimated 1500 gallons of diesel on board. Trajectory and oil persistence support was requested and delivered verbally. Trustees have been notified and ESA Section 7 emergency consultation has been initiated.
On March 3, 2016, the NOAA SSC was contacted by USCG Sector Upper Mississippi River regarding a damaged tug and release of approximately 200-300 gallons of marine diesel fuel within the lock and dam structure near Granite City, IL (Pool 27, Upper Mississippi River MM 184.5). Tug was transiting the lock and reportedly struck the top of the lock causing through hull damage and piercing the #1 fuel tank around 0930. Vessel is stable and secure within the lock. USCG requested product fate and initial trajectory assessment.
On February 18, 2016, the USEPA Region 4 contacted the NOAA SSC regarding a reported release from an 8-inch crude oil pipeline near Magee, MS. The incident was discovered on 16 Feb 2016. Impacted waterbodies include Okatoma Creek and associated wetlands.   Release volume initially reported as 50 bbls. Release secured. EPA requested technical assistance from SSC for review of SCAT data, cleanup recommendations and spot weather forecasts.
On February 16, 2016, the USCG notified the NOAA SSC that the 115 foot fishing vessel TEMPEST was aground on the south shore of Whale Island in the vicinity of Kodiak, AK.  The F/V TEMPEST is carrying 2,000 gallons of diesel, 110 gallons of lube oil, 55 gallons of hydraulic oil and 350,000 pounds of fish. No discharge or damage to the vessel's hull have been reported. The USCG has requested a weather forecast and shoreline information.
On February 12, 2016, the Alaska SSC was notified that the 36-foot FV STELLA MARIE was partially submerged and adrift near Vitskari Rocks near Sitka, Alaska.  The USCG MSD Sitka requested a ESA Section 7 consultation be initiated.
On February 4, 2016, the USCG Sector Baltimore and Virgina DEQ notified the NOAA SSC about an extensive sheen being observed in the Potomac River from the Ronald Reagan National Airport area downriver as far as the Wilson Bridge. Source is unknown but outfall in Roaches Run, Arlington, Virginia appears to be source of oil entering Potomac River.
On January 26, 2016, the USCG notified the NOAA SSC of a collision between two tows in vicinity of Mile Marker 130 on the lower Mississippi River. One of the tows included two (2) barges with cargoes of caustic soda (sodium hydroxide, NaOH), one of which capsized. USCG requested initial chemical hazard assessment for the known contents of the overturned barge.
On January 26, 2016, USCG Sector Lower Mississippi River notified the NOAA SSC of a barge grounding on Arkansas River (MM82). M/V CONCORDIA with 6 barges in tow (2 loaded dry cargo, 1 empty dry cargo, 1 loaded R/F molasses, 02 empty R/F (previous cargo oil) stated that they were traveling upbound on the Arkansas River at MM 82 when they touched bottom resulting in damage and flooding of one barge loaded with dry Urea.  USCG requested product hazard information and resources at risk assessment.
On January 21, 2016, the NOAA SSC was contacted by USCG Sector Lower Mississippi River regarding a barge allision with a bridge.  The UTV AMY FRANCES was pushing barges southbound when it struck Natchez bridge (Hwy 84) in the vicinity of MM 363, LMR. Two tanks on barge sustained damage.  USCG requested on-scene SSC support and  product fate and effect, Resources at Risk, and assistance with emergency notifications.
On January 21, 2016, the USCG Sector Lower Mississippi River notified the NOAA for assistance with the UTV THOMAS KAY allision with the Vicksburg, Mississippi railroad bridge at approximately MM 435.7.  One of the nineteen barges was reported damaged and carrying ethanol.
On January 14, 2016, the NOAA SSC for Hawaii was notified that two military helicopters had downed approximately 1.5 nm offshore of Haleiwa, Oahu. Each aircraft is presumed to have had about 2000 gallons of JP5 fuel aboard. USCG Sector Honolulu has requested forecasts of the oil trajectory, oil persistence, and likelihood of shoreline impacts.
On January 15, 2015, a tug and barge allided with the transfer barge at the Stone Oil dock in New Orleans, LA, discharging approximately 20 gallons of #6 fuel oil from inactive transfer arms which were sheared off in the allision.  USCG requested a trajectory analysis.
On January 13, 2016, the FV Yankee, a 38 foot commercial fishing vessel, ran aground 15 NM N of Sitka, Alaska in Neva Strait.  USCG Marine Safety Detachment (MSD) Sitka is currently conducting a survey of the grounding site. The USCG has requested trajectory and fates analysis and an ESA Section 7 consultation.
On January 12, 2016, the NOAA SSC received a request from USCG Sector Lower Mississippi River for support on product fate and potential downstream impacts from release of denatured alcohol (ethanol) from a barge allision with the Helena Highway Bridge at mile marker 661.7 on the Lower Mississippi River.
On 02-Jan-2016, USCG received a report of a fishing vessel aground in Horseshoe Bay on Latouche Island, Prince William Sound, Alaska. The FV Moonraker, which dragged anchor during a storm, grounded on 31-Dec-2015 with approximately 200 gallons of diesel onboard. A small amount of sheening was observed. All 4 POB rescued. Vessel salvage will occur during appropriate weather window.
On January 2, 2016, the USCG Sector New York notified the NOAA SSC about a leak of dielectric fluid (no polychlorinated biphenyls) from a submerged active high power voltage line that runs between Manhattan, NY and Hudson County, NJ. Sector New York requested trajectory from NOAA. [SEP] News For Further Information: Christopher Hocker, Hudson Transmission Partners, (203) 416-5590 or (203) 417-9684 Email: chocker@powerbridge.us JOINT PRESS STATEMENT ON THE HUDSON RIVER CABLE REPAIR January 04, 2016 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Hudson Transmission Partners, LLC (HTP), owner and operator of an electric power cable buried beneath the Hudson River between Edgewater, New Jersey and New York City, is working closely with the U.S. Coast Guard, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), the New York Department of Environmental Conservation (NYDEC), and other agencies to contain the release of small amounts of non-toxic cable fluid into the Hudson River. The fluid release was detected on January 2 and is the apparent result of damage to a portion of the cable in the Hudson River near the New Jersey shoreline in Edgewater. Spill responders were dispatched to the area on January 2 and have contained the cable fluid with booms and absorbent materials. The rate of leakage is estimated at 3 to 4 gallons per hour. The fluid, which is used inside the cable for insulation, is considered non-toxic and biodegradable, and there are currently no observed environmental impacts in the area. The precise location, cause, and extent of the cable damage is under investigation by means of cable testing and underwater reconnaissance. The results of the investigation will determine the means and method for cable repair. The cable was de-energized immediately upon detection of the fault and will remain out of service until permanent repairs are made. About the HTP Cable: The cable was installed in the Hudson River in December 2011 as part of the Hudson Transmission Project, completed in June of 2013, and is capable of carrying up to 660 MW of electric power between New Jersey and New York City. The project includes a High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) converter station in Ridgefield, New Jersey, and slightly more than seven miles of cable buried on land and beneath the river between Ridgefield and West 49th Street in Manhattan.
On December 29, 2015, MSU Port Arthur notified NOAA SSC of a pipeline leak of  crude oil approximately 12 miles offshore of Sabine Pass, Texas.  Pipeline has been shut in. An estimated 37 gallons was released, producing a 2 mile x 250 ft sheen.  A trajectory has been requested.
On December 21, 2015 the USCG Marine Safety Unit in Morgan City, LA,  notified the NOAA SSC of a leak in a 12-in offshore pipeline carrying Louisiana Sweet Crude and produced water. The operator has shut in pipe, is bleeding down pressure, and deploying recovery assets. An 0.5 mile X 150 ft sheen has been reported. Location is approximately 45 miles offshore. Trajectory requested and in progress.
On December 14, 2015, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator for California was notified by USCG of containers lost from the Matson Container Ship MANOA. On Friday, December 11, the MANOA departed the Port of Oakland bound for Seattle. While maneuvering to disembark the San Francisco based pilot, the vessel rolled in rough seas and 12 containers were believed lost overboard about 8 miles outside the Golden Gate. At least one container has washed ashore and broken open. The USCG requested NOAA assistance in tracking the remaining containers.
On December 14, 2015, the NOAA SSC was informed of a vessel collision on Lower MS River.  The tug M/V Strait sank after colliding with an asphalt barge.  The USCG requested fate and trajectory for fuel on the tug.
On December 14, 2015, two 110-foot tugboats came loose from their moorings in Sweeper Cove in the City of Adak when the pier they were moored to collapsed in a storm.  Both tugs are currently soft aground at the jetty in Sweeper Cove.  Amount of fuel onboard, if any, is unknown.  The USCG Sector Anchorage requested a long-term weather forecast.
On November 17, 2015, the USCG sector New Orleans notified the NOAA SSC regarding a mystery slick observed near Pass A Loutre, LA. NOAA was requested to provide trajectory and weather forecast for the developing incident.
On November 7, 2015, the NOAA SSC received a report from the National Weather Service North Central River Forecast Center that a derailment occurred with a potential spill into the Upper Mississippi River (UMR) near Alma, WI.  It was reported that 12 BNSF train cars derailed, and 6 cars containing denatured alcohol (ethanol) were leaking alcohol into the river. No injuries were reported. No fire was reported. Area was evacuated for safety. NOAA SSC provided fate and effect and response recommendations to USCG Sector Upper Mississippi River.
On November 3, 2015, Frosty Fuels reported a diesel spill from a pipeline rupture at the pier in Cold Bay, Alaska.  USCG Sector Anchorage estimated the spill amount to be 400-600 gallons of diesel and requested a Resource at Risk (RAR) report for the vicinity of the spill.
On November 1, 2015, the USCG Sector New Orleans notified the NOAA SSC about an oil spill that occurred on 30 Oct 2015. USCG confirmed by air that a discharge occurred from a platform and had created an approximate 500'x50' rainbow sheen.
On November 1, 2015, the USCG Sector New Orleans notified the NOAA SSC about a transformer oil spill that occurred at the 2400 Block of Barataria Blvd as the result of an explosion of power equipment (3 regulators) at approximately 0100. USCG reports that approximately 100/300 gallons of potential PCB containing transformer oil was discharged from the damaged regulators and into an adjacent storm drain leading to the Harvey canal system.
On October 30, 2015, the USCG Sector Baltimore notified the NOAA SSC about a JP-4 fuel oil spill that occurred at Ronald Reagan Airport. USCG reports that approximately 8,000 gallons of JP-4 was discharged from a ruptured pipeline and an estimated 3,000 gallons have entered the Potomac River.
On October 27, 2015, the USCG Sector Miami notified the NOAA SSC that a vessel had grounded in the St Lucie Inlet with 5500 gallons of diesel onboard. Some dark oil was seen in the water around the vessel. NOAA trajectory,tides and currents, weather and resources at risk were requested. [SEP] Attached: small diesel spill fact sheet
On October 26, 2015, the USCG MSU notified the NOAA SSC of a grounded tug and barge in Galveston Texas (NRC#1131660).  The barge is empty, tug has a potential of 78,000 gallons of diesel fuel on board.  No discharge has occurred.  Fate, trajectory, and resources at risk requested.
On Sunday, October 18, 2015, the USCG Marine Safety Unit Paducah contacted the NOAA SSC for an ALOHA (Air) plume trajectory for a potential release of anhydrous ammonia.  UTV SCOTT STEGBAUER became aground in the Ohio River due to change in water level.  UTV SCOTT STEGBAUER is loaded with two barges of anhydrous ammonia containing 71,389 gallons total.  No damage, injuries or pollution reported.
On October 05, 2015, 7th Coast Guard District contacted the NOAA SSC regarding a possible sunken container ship, the El Faro Monday, which is believed to have sunk during Hurricane Joaquin.  While searching in the vicinity of the ship's last known position 35 nautical miles northeast of Crooked Islands, Bahamas, the Coast Guard located a deceased person in a survival suit in the water. A heavily damaged life boat with markings consistent with those on board the El Faro, a partially submerged life raft, life jackets, life rings, cargo containers and an oil sheen were also located by Coast Guard aircrews within a 225 square nautical mile search area. Search and rescue operations continue. Coast Guard has requested assistance with trajectory assessment for potential oil spill associated with sunken vessel.
On October 2, 2015, the USCG Sector Columbia River contacted NOAA ERD to report the bulk carrier Global Gold struck the dock while coming into the pier resulting in a rupture in the hull 3-4 feet long on the port side of the vessel.  The vessel reportedly lost up to 1100 gallons of diesel.  A trajectory forecast was requested.
On October 1, 2015, NOAA ERD opened a hotline to capture general information regarding any pollution incidents and response activities along the Atlantic Seaboard from the passage of Hurricane Joaquin. Incident specific hotlines may be opened later.
On September 28, 2015, the USCG Sector North Carolina notified the NOAA SSC of an estimated 500 gallon diesel fuel spill from an underground pipeline at an assisted living facility into Nelson Bay, a waterbody in Pamlico Sound. A clean-up contractor is on scene deploying both hard boom and sorbent boom within the affected area.
On October 20, 1937, the tank barge Argo foundered in a storm and sank in western Lake Erie.  At the time of the sinking, the barge was reportedly loaded with 4,762 barrels of crude oil and benzol.  The vessel was identified in the 2013 NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Environmental Threats) report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the wreck was unknown.  Recently the vessel was located, confirmed to be in U.S. waters of Lake Erie, and appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery to be intact and may be periodically leaking. [SEP] USCG announces completion of lightering [SEP] USCG [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering operations began today for the Lake Erie sunken tanker barge Argo as Unified Command responders took advantage of a favorable weather window. The first of Argo???€?s eight tanks are being tapped and offloaded. The product will be pumped into a specialized container on a work barge where it will be run through a series of carbon filters to separate and remove the flammable vapors from the product. The contents will again be sampled to gain a better understanding of the contents of Argo???€?s hold. This step-by-step, methodical process will ensure operations are conducted in the safest possible manner for both responders and the public. As weather allows, responders will continue salvage operations one tank at a time. The Unified Command, consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public and the environment. If a spill were to occur, response equipment and detailed plans created from the Area Contingency Plan and various experts involved in the response are in place to mitigate any possible threats. As an additional precautionary measure, the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through, or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge Argo in Lake Erie continue as the Unified Command proceeds with plans for product recovery. Crews will start prepping the first tank this week for ???€?hot tapping???€? operations. Actual lightering operations will not occur until later in the week at the earliest, as the response operators are still waiting for the proper tank to offload the material into and weather continues to impede operations. The results from the sample from this first tank, sampled on November 9, were found to be primarily Benzene, with some Toluene, Xylene and trace elements of petroleum. Because these materials are not typically shipped on the Great Lakes, the proper equipment to remove it is not available in this region. Response operators are waiting for receiving tanks, designed for chemicals, to be modified for use on a barge in the Great Lakes marine environment. In the meantime, the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] news story on sinking [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod Office: (419) 392-0323 UPDATE 3: Crews continue response for sunken Lake Erie barge CLEVELAND - Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance from the site of a sunken barge near Kelleys Island Shoal in Lake Erie Thursday. The unified command, consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public and the environment. During dive operations Wednesday, a pinhole-sized leak was detected in one of the cargo tanks and was successfully secured by the dive team. As a precautionary measure, on-scene responders were taken to a local hospital for medical evaluation and have since been released. Surface operations were suspended to ensure safety of all responders and will resume when site safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders to return. A Coast Guard helicopter from Air Station Detroit launched to provide an over-flight assessment of the area Thursday. Results from a sheen sample collected were returned and indicate the sample was typical of a light to medium refined oil that had significantly degraded over time. T&T Marine Salvage crews completed their general assessment of the barge Monday, with a total of 12 hatches discovered. Four of those hatches were not secured and the remaining eight hatches were closed with no leaks detected. Samples were taken from the sediment inside the open compartments and have been sent for testing. Due to the potential threat from any remaining cargo in the tanks with secured hatches, the unified command will continue assessing the site in anticipation of removing any remaining product. The Coast Guard established a safety zone, located 8 nautical miles east of Kelleys Island and extending 1,000 feet around position 41-38'21"N, 082-29'35"W, remains in effect and is closed to all traffic until canceled. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF-FM channel 16. The Canadian Coast Guard is working closely with the Unified Command to ensure necessary preparedness and response on both sides of the international border. The Canadian Coast Guard deployed environmental response personnel to the Unified Command in Toledo, Ohio, to ensure every community remains up to date on the latest developments. Saving Lives and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG Update 9 - Argo Response ends. [SEP] Source: USCG. Please see the attachment for a full description. [SEP] 2013 report. The barge location is reported to be 5 miles south of the reported position in this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
On September 13, 2015, the USCG contacted NOAA ERD regarding a vessel adrift in the North side of Bristol Bay, Alaska.  The vessel was unmanned and approximately 3 miles offshore.  The USCG requested a vessel drift trajectory.
On September 13, 2015, the USCG Sector New York notified the NOAA SSC about a 29 foot recreational fishing vessel, THE PRECIOUS II, that grounded on the northern end of Sandy Hook. The location is part of Gateway National Park and managed by National Park Service. The vessel contained a max potential 300 gallons of gasoline. The area is considered an extremely environmentally sensitive area, due to the presence of piping plovers, American Tiger Beetle and Beach Amerynthe, endangered plant.
On September 13, 2015, the USCG Sector New York notified the NOAA SSC about a capsized vessel off of Sandy Hook, NJ. It is a 25 foot commercial tow vessel that capsized. Vessel has as much as 150 gallons of gasoline on board. USCG requested that NOAA prepare a trajectory.
On September 12, 2015, the NOAA SSC was notified by the USCG Marine Safety Unit in Morgan City, Louisiana, of a mystery sheen offshore of Grand Isle, LA.  USCG requested a trajectory and evaluation of potential shoreline impact on Grand Isle and/or potential oiling of the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP).
On September 3, 2015, the USCG District 8 notified the NOAA SSC of a collision between two towing vessels on the Lower Mississippi River at MM 937 in the vicinity of Columbus, KY.  One barge of slurry oil was severely damaged and discharged one tank's entire contents.  USCG requests NOAA to provide product fate and effects. [SEP] Several links to NOAA products [SEP] NOAA Is Supporting Oil Spill Response in Kentucky After Tugs Collide on Mississippi River September 3, 2015 by Office of Response and Restoration Leave a comment On the evening of September 2, 2015, two tug boats collided on the Mississippi River near Columbus, Kentucky, spilling slurry oil into the river. Early reports, which later may be corrected, indicate an estimated 120,500 gallons of oil were released from a hole in the cargo tank of a barge being towed by the tug Dewey R during the collision. The spill and ensuing response have closed the river between mile markers 938 and 922, south of Paducah, Kentucky. At the request of the U.S. Coast Guard, NOAA???€?s Office of Response and Restoration is supporting the response and sending oil spill and data management experts to the scene of the spill. NOAA scientific support coordinators are providing a variety of information for the response, including river flow forecasts, chemistry of the spilled oil, a submerged oil assessment (because this heavier oil may sink), and other information to help determine where the spill will go and what can be done to protect our waterways and keep commerce moving. The natural resource agencies also are beginning to assess potential impacts to natural resources, a first step to determining whether restoration is needed as a result of the spill. Updates from NOAA about this oil spill may be available on IncidentNews. What Is Slurry Oil? Slurry oil is a residual oil resulting from the refining process and when spilled, most of it will sink or become suspended in the water column. A U.S. Coast Guard overflight the morning of September 3 revealed a floating sheen of oil four to five miles downstream of the discharge, which is not unexpected with this type of heavy oil. Learn more about different types of oil and their behaviors when spilled and read about a 2005 slurry oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico. How Is an Oil Spill in a River Different Than One in the Ocean? From dams and density to muddy waters and vegetation, rivers offer a very different environment than the ocean during an oil spill. Read more about the kinds of unique challenges we have to consider during an oil spill in a river. More Information About Oil Spills Find basic information related to oil spills, cleanup, impacts, and restoration, as well as NOAA???€?s role during and after oil spills. [SEP] How Is an Oil Spill in a River Different Than One in the Ocean? http://response.restoration.noaa.gov/about/media/how-oil-spill-river-different-one- ocean.html? utm_source=OR%26R+Update+August+2015&utm_campaign=OR%26R+Update+August+2015&utm_med ium=email
On Sept 2, 2015, the FV Pacific Venture, a wood-hulled 58’ limit seiner,  grounded and subsequently rolled over in the vicinity of The Twins roughly 0.5 to 0.75 nm off the mouth of Indian River, in Sitka, Alaska. The vessel contains approximately 600 gallons of diesel and 50 gallons of other oils.  The USCG MSD Sitka requests fates analysis and trajectory. [SEP] Responders from SEAPRO monitor containment boom around the motor vessel Pacific Venture near Sitka, Alaska, Sept. 3, 2015. A Unified Command was established in response to the sinking of the Pacific Venture Wednesday. (Photograph by Petty Officer 3rd Class Lewis Beck.)
On August 22, 2015, MSU Mogan City contacted NOAA SSC requesting evaluation of and trajectory for a mystery sheen reported by platform operators in Eugene Island Block 142.  Upon review of photos, oceanographer and SSC determined substance was likely not oil.  As a precaution, a trajectory analysis was requested.
On August 13, 2015, USCG received a report of the F/V Sheryl Ann hard aground near Spruce Island, near Kodiak, Alaska. The Sheryl Ann is a 47ft purse seine, 26GT, with 1000 gallon fuel capacity. Vessel master reports approximately 250 gallons of diesel on board at the time of the incident.
On August 11, 2015, the 86-FT Fishing Tender Egegik Spirit grounded after dragging anchor near Olsen Island, Prince William Sound, AK.  The total fuel capacity is reported to be 5,000 gallons.  The vessel also has approximately 94,000 lbs of fish on board.  USCG Valdez requests fate and trajectory and resources at risk analysis.
On August 2, 2015, the 82 foot F/V ICELANDER ran aground on Latouche Island, Alaska.  Vessel has approximately 12,000-15,000 gallons of diesel on board with 200 gallons of lube oil and 250 gallons of hydraulic oil on board.
On August 2, 2015, the USCG Sector New York notified NOAA of an oil spill from a pipeline into the Kill Van Kull, near Bayonne, NJ. The source of the oil is a pipeline owned by IMTT. It was estimated that 350 barrels of #6 oil was released at 2200 on the night of 1 August. The company reported that most of the oil was contained in boom. The USCG requested a trajectory to help locate any uncontained oil at first light.
On July 20, 2015, USCG Sector Houston-Galveston contacted the NOAA SSC regarding  a barge collision near the Texas City Y.  One barge, containing naptha, was reported to have a punctured tank. Specific amount released unknown at time of report. Barge had been pushed to the bank, and was reported to be on fire.  A second barge, containing toluene, was involved in the collision, but was reported to be secure.  Chemical fate and properties information was requested and provided.
On July 20, 2015, the USCG MSU Morgan City contacted the NOAA SSC to request evaluation of a pipeline leak site in a marsh for a potential in-situ burn(ISB). Products discharged in the marsh include natural gas condensate, crude oil, and produced water. USCG also requested assistance in documenting resources at risk and coordination with federal and state agencies.
On July 14, 2015, the FV Copper Star, a 76 foot steel hulled fishing tender, ran aground at Hawkins Island in Prince William Sound. The vessel is reported to have approximately 1,000 to 2,000 gallons of diesel on board. Fuel tanks are not reported to be leaking. The USCG has requested Resources at Risk information and assistance with coordination with USFWS and NMFS.
On July 14, 2015, the FV Elizabeth F, an 81 foot fishing vessel grounded near False Pass, Alaska.  The fishing vessel is listing on its starboard side with five thousand gallons of diesel fuel on board.  Initially, a sheen was reported but has dissipated in the last hour.  The master of the vessel reported that the sheen came from a discharge of 1 gallon of hydraulic oil.  The Elizabeth F will attempt to refloat at the next high tide.  The vessel does not have catch on board. USCG is requesting Resources at Risk for the area.
On July 11, 2015, NOAA NESDIS submitted a "Marine Pollution Surveillance Report" to the National Response Center regarding a potential oil "anomoly" off shore of southern Long Island.  The USCG D1 Command Center contacted the NOAA SSC for more information and to produce a trajectory so that air assets could better target the anomaly for investigation.
On July 5, 2015, the USCG San Juan notified the SSC that a 22 foot recreational vessel grounded on a reef in St. Thomas, USVI.  The  vessel reportedly had 12 gallons of gasoline aboard and there may have been impact to the coral associated with the grounding.
On July 6, 2015, the USCG Sector San Juan notified the SSC that the 50 foot passenger vessel, Sacraficio II had grounded on Mona Island, Puerto Rico.  The grounding occurred on July 5.  The vessel has 320 gallons of diesel onboard. The vessel appears to be grounded on sand only on or near the shoreline which is Hawksbill seaturtle critical habitat. No indications of coral impacts have been reported.
On July 2, 2015, USCG Sector New Orleans notified NOAA about a barge collision on the Lower Mississippi River, near mile marker 150.  One barge sank, reportedly carrying a load of caustic soda (NaOH).  USCG requested potential fate of the material.
On June 30, 2015, the USCG Sector Mobile contacted the NOAA SSC regarding a 53 ft wooden hulled fishing vessel which has run aground off the west end of Dauphin Island, AL. The vessel is believed to have 500 gallons of marine diesel aboard and no discharge has been reported. USCG has requested a worst case discharge analysis.
On June 30, 2015, the USCG Sector Mobile contacted the NOAA SSC regarding a WWII era seaplane which has run aground on the sandbar about 50 feet from shore on Perdido Key, FL. The seaplane is believed to be carrying 400 gallons of aviation gas (avgas). No discharge has been reported. The seaplane was involved in a movie being filmed locally and experienced mechanical problems forcing it to land. Upon landing, the seaplane began to take on water and was intentionally run aground onto the sandbar. USCG is requesting a worst case discharge analysis. [SEP] Posted: Monday, June 29, 2015 9:44 pm | Updated: 12:38 pm, Tue Jun 30, 2015. By JOHN MULLEN johnm@gulfcoastmedia.com | 0 comments ORANGE BEACH, AL - A vintage Catalina PBY flying boat being used in the filming of the Nicolas Cage movie "USS Indianapolis: Men of Courage" was beached near the iconic Flora-Bama lounge on Monday, June 29. According to Orange Beach fire officials, during work on the movie the antique craft started taking on water and it ended up beached. On Tuesday morning, June 30, film crews were on site with director Mario Van Peebles talking about possible filming around the plane where it is beached, according to a crew member who requested anonymity The Catalina PBY was one of the planes that played an instrumental part in the rescue of sailors after the Indianapolis was sunk by Japanese torpedoes near the end of World War II. At about 3 p.m. Monday, it was reported as secured. About 5 p.m. a crew arrived with two tractors to try and pull the plane to the beach. A cable was attached to the plane and to one of the tractors and another chain was looped between the two tractors. Both tried to pull the plane free but the cable snapped and crews were unable to free the plane from the sandbar. A pump was running the entire time removing water from inside the plane. Officials were making plans to remove the plane again but no timetable was set for its removal. [SEP] Photos from news story [SEP] Posted: Monday, June 29, 2015 9:44 pm | Updated: 12:38 pm, Tue Jun 30, 2015. By JOHN MULLEN johnm@gulfcoastmedia.com | 0 comments ORANGE BEACH, AL - A vintage Catalina PBY flying boat being used in the filming of the Nicolas Cage movie "USS Indianapolis: Men of Courage" was beached near the iconic Flora-Bama lounge on Monday, June 29. According to Orange Beach fire officials, during work on the movie the antique craft started taking on water and it ended up beached. On Tuesday morning, June 30, film crews were on site with director Mario Van Peebles talking about possible filming around the plane where it is beached, according to a crew member who requested anonymity The Catalina PBY was one of the planes that played an instrumental part in the rescue of sailors after the Indianapolis was sunk by Japanese torpedoes near the end of World War II. At about 3 p.m. Monday, it was reported as secured. About 5 p.m. a crew arrived with two tractors to try and pull the plane to the beach. A cable was attached to the plane and to one of the tractors and another chain was looped between the two tractors. Both tried to pull the plane free but the cable snapped and crews were unable to free the plane from the sandbar. A pump was running the entire time removing water from inside the plane. Officials were making plans to remove the plane again but no timetable was set for its removal. [SEP] Photos from news story
On June 21, 2015, the USCG Marine Safety Unit at Texas City, Texas, notified the NOAA SSC of a suspected crude oil pipeline break on a Bolivar Peninsula beach.  The suspected break was discovered by a harbor patrol responding to a separate incident on June 20.  A responsible party has not been identified.  Amount released and rate of release are unknown at this point. No oil has been observed reaching the water, but surveys of the dune area revealed sheen in water pools among the dunes.
On June 10, 2015, the NOAA SSC received report from USCG Sector Houston regarding allision between two Kirby Inland Marine barges in the vicinity of Greens Bayou, Houston Ship Channel. The Kirby Barge 28018 hit the Kirby Barge 28020 while it was tied up. The Kirby Barge 28020 was reported to be leaking petroleum naphtha, a light petroleum product that readily evaporates.  The USCG requested Aloha (Areal Locations of Hazardous Atmospheres) analysis.
On June 10, 2015, the FV Kupreanof, an 80' fishing vessel, sank approximately 45 nautical miles NNW of Cape Spencer (west of Glacier Bay National Park & Preserve). The maximum fuel capacity is 7,200 gallons of diesel, with another 100 gallons other oils. USCG Sector Juneau has requested a fates analysis and trajectory for the 7200 gallons of diesel.
On June 3, 2015, the USCG Sector Anchorage notified the SSC regarding a barge aground near Kongiganek, AK.  The barge is not leaking at this time, but USCG requested resources at risk.  The barge is reported to be loaded with 50,000 gallons of jet fuel, 17,000 gallons of diesel, 1,000 gallons on unleaded gasoline, and 100 gallons of lube oil.
On June 3, 2015, the USCG Sector New York notified the NOAA SSC of a dielectric oil spill from a Con Edison power line.  Con Edison is working to find the breach in the line and conduct oil recovery, line repair and soil remediation.
On May 27, 2015, a National Response Center (NRC) report was generated regarding oil observations on Manhattan Beach, CA. Hindcast trajectory has been requested and analysis will begin to determine to if the incident is related to the Refugio Incident, Santa Barbara CA spill.
On May 26, 2015, the USCG MSU Port Arthur notified the NOAA SSC that M/V Jian Quang, a 615-foot bulk carrier loaded with sulfur, was grounded outside the jetties of Sabine Pass. No pollution is anticipated. PORTS information from the station at Buoy 34 was requested and provided.
On May 19, 2015 the NOAA was notified of a 24-inch pipeline rupture that occurred earlier today near Refugio State Beach in Santa Barbara County, CA. An estimated 500 barrels (21,000 gallons) of crude oil was released on the shoreside of Hwy 101 which then flowed into the Pacific Ocean. The source has since been secured. USCG personnel estimated the size of the sheen to be 3.5 NM along the beach and 50-100 yards into the water. Oil Spill Recovery Organizations are on-scene to conduct cleanup operations. California Department of Fish and Wildlife has ordered beach closures. The US Coast Guard has stood up Incident Management Team and is conducting overflights. NOAA has been requested to provide fate and effects of the crude oil and Resources at Risk information. [SEP] Case: Refugio Incident Photographer: NOAA ALT1 Date: 2015-05-21 07:41:46 Location: Refugio State Beach Latitude: 34.4573270636 Longitude: -120.083700077 Comment: Oiled shoreline Imported from PhotoLogger. Photo credit: NOAA [SEP] Case: Refugio Incident Photographer: NOAA ALT1 Date: 2015-05-21 07:41:37 Location: Refugio State Beach Latitude: 34.4577047273 Longitude: -120.080520455 Comment: Oiled shoreline Imported from PhotoLogger. Photo Credit: NOAA [SEP] USCG photo facing Eastward showing closer view of shoreline oiling along Refugio State Beach. Dark oil is visible in the intertidal extending out into the surfline. Oil does not appear to be penetrating water-saturated sand. [SEP] Also on JIC website [SEP] FNUS76 KLOX 211141 FWSLOX SPOT FORECAST FOR REFUGIO INCIDENT...USCG NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LOS ANGELES/OXNARD CA 441 AM PDT THU MAY 21 2015 FORECAST IS BASED ON INCIDENT TIME OF 0333 PDT ON MAY 21. IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE. .DISCUSSION... TODAY THROUGH FRIDAY...COOL TEMPERATURES AND PARTLY TO MOSTLY CLOUDY SKIES WILL PREVAIL AS A LOW PRESSURE SYSTEM APPROACHES FROM THE NORTHWEST TODAY AND SWEEPS ACROSS SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA TONIGHT AND FRIDAY. THIS MORNING...THERE MAY BE SOME LOCALIZED DRIZZLE AROUND THE AREA. FOR LATE TONIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY MORNING...THERE IS A SLIGHT CHANCE OF SOME LIGHT SHOWERS. LIGHT NORTHERLY WINDS THIS MORNING WILL GRADUALLY SHIFT TO THE WEST BY THIS AFTERNOON...BEFORE TURNING NORTHERLY AGAIN THIS EVENING AND OVERNIGHT. WESTERLY WINDS IN THE AFTERNOON COULD GUST BETWEEN 15 AND 20 MPH. FOR SATURDAY THROUGH EARLY NEXT WEEK...NO SIGNIFICANT WEATHER OR SURF EVENTS ARE EXPECTED. .TODAY... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLOUDY (75-85 PERCENT) THEN BECOMING PARTLY CLOUDY (45-55 PERCENT). PATCHY DRIZZLE IN THE MORNING. TEMPERATURE.........MAX 61-64. RH..................MIN 64-68 PERCENT. WIND (20 FT)........0500-0800: NORTH 2-5 MPH. 0800-1300: SOUTH TO SOUTHWEST 3-7 MPH. 1300-1800: WEST 10-15 MPH GUST 20 MPH. SWELL HEIGHT........WEST 2 TO 3 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........10 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........1-3 FEET. .TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........CLOUDY (90-100 PERCENT). SLIGHT CHANCE OF SHOWERS AFTER MIDNIGHT. TEMPERATURE.........MIN 50-54. RH..................MAX 90-100 PERCENT. WIND (20 FT)........1800-2000: WEST 10-15 MPH GUST 20 MPH. 2000-2300: NORTHWEST 6-12 MPH. 2300-0600: NORTH 2-5 MPH. SWELL HEIGHT........WEST 2 TO 3 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........13 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........1 TO 3 FEET. .FRIDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........CLOUDY (85-95 PERCENT) THEN BECOMING PARTLY CLOUDY (45-55 PERCENT). SLIGHT CHANCE OF SHOWERS IN THE MORNING. TEMPERATURE.........MAX 58-62. RH..................MIN 66-70 PERCENT. WIND (20 FT)........0600-0800: NORTH 2-5 MPH. 0800-1200: SOUTH TO SOUTHWEST 3-7 MPH. 1200-1800: WEST 10-15 MPH GUST 20 MPH. SWELL HEIGHT........WEST 2 TO 3 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........12 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........1-3 FEET. $$ FORECASTER...THOMPSON/BRUNO REQUESTED BY...NWS OXNARD TYPE OF REQUEST...HAZMAT .TAG 20150521.REFUG.01/LOX [SEP] USCG photo facing Southward showing closer view of shoreline oiling along Refugio State Beach. Dark oil is visible in the intertidal extending out into the surfline. Oil does not appear to be penetrating water-saturated sand. [SEP] Shoreline Oiling Map as of 26 May 2015. Taken from the JIC Public website. http://www.refugioresponse.com/external/content/document/7258/2521310/1/refugiomap.pdf [SEP] Fisheries closure notice and map [SEP] USCG photo from blufftop above and immediately West of Refugio State Park. Dark band of oil is visible across exposed intertidal area, but width of band lessens towards the Eastern end (right of photo). [SEP] Also on JIC website
The M/V Algoma Spirit ran aground in the St. Lawrence River near the Seaway International Bridge, northeast of Massena, NY. The vessel is reported to be carrying 200 Metric Tons of HFO and 60 Metric tons of Diesel. No pollution reported at this time. USCG Sector Buffalo requested trajectory, fate, and resources at risk support as precaution.
On Sunday May 17, 2015, NOAA was notified of a collision between the fishing vessel Elizabeth J and the recreational vessel Nina Marie approximately 17 miles south of Patchogue, NY. All persons were rescued by the USCG. It was estimated that the combined total oil on both vessels added up to 730 gallons of diesel fuel. The fishing vessel sank and the recreational vessel was towed back to port.
On May 14, 2015, the M/V Aubi, a powered catamaran, ran aground in the vicinity of Punta Tuna, Aercibo, Puerto Rico. The aluminum vessel is reported to contain 800 gallons of diesel fuel. A towing company has been hired for salvage operations. The vessel is hard aground and there are coral in the area. Coral damage has been reported due to the grounding.
On May 6, 2015, the USCG Sector Puget Sound notified NOAA of an overturned skiff near La Push, Wa.  The vessel was heavily encrusted with marine growth and potentially from the Japan tsunami.  The NOAA Marine Debris Program was notified.
On May 3, 2015 the Coast Guard notified NOAA of the sinking of the F/V Sea Beast in the Olympic National Marine Sanctuary, with a potential of 500 gallons of diesel on board.
On April 27, 2015, the USCG notified NOAA of an abandoned hull floating off the Oregon Coast. The vessel is approximately 18ft long and has heavy marine growth.  It is suspected to be Japan tsunami marine debris.
On April 22, 2015, the M/V MISSISSAGI ran aground in the lower St. Mary’s River. USCG Sector Sault Sainte Marie requested trajectory, fate, and effects for the potential release of the 55 metric tons of Marine Diesel and 185 metric tons of Heavy Fuel Oil onboard.
On April 21, 2015, the NOAA SSC was notified by the USCG Sector Houston regarding a mystery spill in Cedar Bayou east of Baytown, Texas.  The incident occurred on or around evening of 18 April 2015. Initial estimates of the spill are 20-40 bbls. Product spilled is unknown. The USCG is seeking assistance in spilled product identification and locating possible source of release.
On April 17, 2015, the USCG contacted the NOAA SSC for consultation on a pipeline spill in Illinois.  An underwater 8” pipeline carrying Low Sulphur Diesel across the Cahokia Canal ruptured with an estimated 1200-3000 gallons of product spilling before being secured.  The Cahokia Canal leads to the Mississippi River.
On April 14, 2015, the USCG MSU Texas City contacted the NOAA SSC requesting assessment of potential discharge of an oil condensate pipeline currently under repair.  The pipeline currently has a pinhole leak and divers are working to locate and repair the leak.
On April 14, 2015,  USCG Sector Puget Sound notified NOAA of a sunken pleasure craft that was completely submerged at its slip in Shipyard Cove Marina, Friday Harbor, Washington. The 36ft Grand Bank pleasure craft "SEAWOLF" is estimated to have approximately 400 gallons of diesel on board and is leaking.  The vessel location has been boomed.
On Apr 9, 2015, the USCG reported an abandoned boat drifting off the Oregon coast.  The vessel is approximately 30 feet long and is suspected Japan tsunami debris.
On April 6, 2015, the USCG Sector New Orleans notified the NOAA SSC of collision between two deep draft vessels (M/V Privocean and M/V Bravo) in the Lower Mississippi River at River Mile Marker 160.  M/V Bravo was transferring a heavy crude oil, and the transfer arms were damaged, spilling an unknown amount of oil into the river. [SEP] News Release April 06, 2015 U.S. Coast Guard Eighth District External Affairs Contact: U.S. Coast Guard Heartland Email: 8district-external@uscg.mil Office: (618) 225-9008 Coast Guard responds to multi-ship collision on Mississippi River NEW ORLEANS ???€? The Coast Guard is responding to an collision on the lower Mississippi River near Convent, Louisiana, Monday. Watchstanders at Coast Guard Sector New Orleans received report at approximately 4:00 p.m., the motor vessel Privocean, a 751 foot bulk carrier, broke free from its mooring and drifted down river and collided with the 98 foot towing vessel Texas which was moored at the time. The crew of the Texas taken to hospital for medical evaluation but no injuries were reported at this time. The Privocean continued to drift down river and also collided with the motor vessel Bravo, an 816 foot tank ship, which was off loading crude oil at the time of the incident. The Bravo was able to complete emergency shutdown procedures before breaking free of her moorings and connection points, causing an oil spill. The Privocean was able to get underway and anchor at mile marker 162. The Bravo is half a mile down the river from its original position and is anchored with a two tug escort. All vessels are being actively being monitored by the U.S. Coast Guard response teams. The Mississippi River is closed from mile marker 163 to mile marker 154. The Texas is currently stable and not taking on water or discharging any oil. The Bravo currently has a three tug escort, the vessel is stable but taking on water in the ballast tanks. The Bravo???€?s propeller is currently fouled with a mooring line, but remains stable at anchor with tug escorts. The facility arms, the source of the discharge, were secured and containment boom was deployed by an Oil Spill Response Organization. Coast Guard response teams along with OMI Environmental Services are currently responding to the spill. Approximately 126 gallons of oil were spilled on deck of the Bravo, but was contained and is currently being cleaned. Initial assessments show approximately 420 gallons of oil discharged into the river. The Coast Guard informed the down-river Parish Officials to protect municipal water supplies. U.S. Coast Guard is actively monitoring the situation of all three vessel and affected areas down river. U.S. Coast Guard will continue to evaluate any potential impacts to the environment. The cause of the incident is currently under investigation.
On March 30th 2015, the USCG notified the NOAA SSC of a distress call from the Canadian flagged "Liana Ransom," a 65 foot sailing ship (so-called "Tall Ship").  The ship reported her engines were out and the sails were fouled around the mast.  The USCG rescued all 9 crew by boat and helicopter.   The vessel is carrying approximated 400 gallons of diesel and 20 gallons of gasoline.  She remains adrift east of the eastern boundary of the Stellwagan Bank National Marine Sanctuary.  She is drifting east on predominantly westerly winds.  She is not taking on water.
On March 31, 2015, the Towboat Rebecca Lynn reported a hull breach west of the Straits of Mackinac in Lake Michigan. USCG Sector Sault Sainte Marie requested trajectory, fate, and effects for the potential release of the 1500 gallons of diesel onboard.
USCG Sector Miami contacted the NOAA for trajectory support information based on two separate dark anomalies reported by NESDIS Marine Pollution Surveillance Report on Mar. 21.  The anomalies were identified trailing moving vessels in a satellite image from March 20th off the southeast coast of FL.  Both anomalies are narrow, elongated, and suspected to be oil based on satellite characteristics including varying widths within relatively strong 20 kt surface wind environment.  The dimensions of the northern anomaly is 7.4 miles long by 0.2 miles at its widest.  The southern anomaly is 4.6 miles long by 0.1 miles at its widest.
On March 16, 2015, the USCG MSD Ketchikan, AK, contacted NOAA ERD to request a trajectory for a potential diesel fuel spill from the grounded F/V Tonto III.  The subject F/V broke free of it's mooring during the weekend, grounded on the shore of Wadleigh Island (along the western shore of Prince of Wales Island) and became flooded on an incoming tide.  USCG MSD requested trajectory support in the event of a release.
On March 13, 2015, the USEPA notified ERD of a waste vegetable oil spill on the banks of McCarthy Creek in Beaverton, Oregon.  Approximately 2000 gallons of oil was spilled.  Unknown if oil has entered the creek.  USEPA requested information on anadromous species.
On March 9, 2015, the M/V Carla Maersk and M/V Conti Peridot collided in Galveston Bay, TX. The  M/V Carla Maersk was carrying methyl-tert-butyl-ether (MTBE).  It was reported that three cargo tanks were breeched and an unknown amount of MTBE has spilled.  USCG has requested NOAA scientific support including chemicals fate in the water and air, ecological and human health hazards, chemical trajectory, and environmental resources at risk information. [SEP] Photo Source: US Coast Guard Posted on: GCaptain.com [SEP] Photo Source: US Coast Guard Posted on: GCaptain.com [SEP] Photo Source: US Coast Guard Posted on: GCaptain.com [SEP] The chemical tanker Carla Maersk sits at anchor off Morgan's Point, Texas, after being involved in a collision with the bulk carrier Conti Peridot March 9, 2015. The Maersk was carrying about 216,000 barrels of Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether and an unknown quantity of the product was spilled. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Dustin R. Williams) [SEP] Photo Source: US Coast Guard Posted on: GCaptain.com [SEP] Photo Source: US Coast Guard Posted on: GCaptain.com [SEP] The official name of the incident was changed from MV Carla Maersk to "Morgan's Point Collision". [SEP] "Notice re Vessel Collision on the Houston Ship Channel Posted on: March 9, 2015 Following a collision today between two vessels in the Houston Ship Channel near Morgan's Point, the Barbours Cut Container Terminal has suspended operations. Business operations continue at all other Port of Houston Authority terminals, including the Bayport Container Terminal, and the Port Authority will advise when Barbours Cut Terminal resumes normal business operations. Media inquiries should be directed to the U.S. Coast Guard, which is in charge of the response. Houston-area USCG Public Affairs can be reached at 832-293- 1293." http://www.portofhouston.com/inside-the-port- authority/communications/business-news/notice-re-vessel-collision-on-the- houston-ship-channel/ [SEP] The chemical tanker Carla Maersk sits at anchor off Morgan's Point, Texas, after being involved in a collision with the bulk carrier Conti Peridot March 9, 2015. The Maersk was carrying about 216,000 barrels of Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether and an unknown quantity of the product was spilled. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Dustin R. Williams) [SEP] "Vessel Traffic Services Houston-Galveston and the U.S. Coast Guard have confirmed a vessel collision on the Houston Ship Channel at 12:30PM CST on Monday involving the bulk carrier MV Conti Peridot carrying a cargo of steel and the chemical tanker Carla Maersk carrying 216,000 bbls of MTBE. The Coast Guard says the Carla Maersk is listing and that upwards of three port cargo tanks may have been breached. An unknown quantity of the ship???€?s cargo has leaked into the channel. The collision occurred approximately 1 kilometer south of the entrance to Barbours Cut. The U.S. Coast Guard has shut down the Houston Ship Channel between light 86 to Morgan???€?s Point. An update from the USCG Alert and Warning System issued at 2:15 CDT read: ???€?A discharge of MTBE, Methyl Tert-Butyl Ether, has occurred following a collision at Morgan Point on the Houston Ship Channel. Primary hazard is flammability, and odor detection threshold is very low ???€? 50 PPM. Port entities are advised the Houston Ship Channel is closed to all traffic from light 86 to Morgans Point High lines. A Unified command is being established ???€? follow any protective orders issued by municipal & county authorities.???€? The following notice by Candice Armenoff, Port of Houston Authority Customer Service Manager was posted on gCaptain???€?s Facebook page: Barbours Cut and APM Terminals are under and evacuation order. Drivers that are inside of the terminal will be escorted off by Port Police. Containers will not be allowed to exit the terminal as US Customs has also evacuated. Containers and Chassis can be dollied down inside of the terminal. I will be sure to follow up with details as I get them. An update from the Port of Houston said that business operations continue at all Port of Houston Authority terminals with the exception of the Barbours Cut Container Terminal. The National Transportation Safety Board says it has sent a team to investigate the collision. A ???€?Shelter In Place???€? order is in effect for Morgan???€?s Point, according to the City of La Porte???€?s Office of Emergency Management. A.P. M??ller Maersk spokesperson Mikkel Elbek Linnet said in an emailed statement, ???€?Carla Maersk crew are safe and accounted for, and there are no reports of injury and fire on the vessel. Vessel is anchored in Houston Ship Channel and not in immediate danger. A response team is working on handling the incident.???€? MTBE, or methyl tertiary-butyl ether, is a chemical compound that is primarily used as a fuel additive in motor gasoline. Weather in the area was reported to be foggy with light rain. Today???€?s incident follows a collision last Thursday (March 5th) involving the Hamburg S??d-owned containership Monte Alegre and the chemical tanker Chembulk Houston, which briefly shut portion of the channel. No injuries or pollution were reported as a result of that incident." http://gcaptain.com/chemical-tanker-listing-houston-ship-channel-following- collision/ [SEP] Photo Source: US Coast Guard Posted on: GCaptain.com
On March 5, 2015, the USCG requested NOAA SSC assistance for the BNSF Train Derailment along the banks of the Mississippi River south of Galena, IL. The accident occurred in the vicinity of the confluence of the Galena River and the Mississippi River near Mississippi River Mile Marker 565.3.  According to a statement from BSNF, the train has 105 cars, 103 of which were carrying crude oil.
On February 22, 2015, the USCG received a report of a large oil sheen in the Auke Bay Harbor, AK, approximately 10 miles north of Juneau, AK.  The source was unknown. The material was tentatively identified as used motor oil.
On February 16, 2015, a CSX train derailed near the Kanawha River in West Virginia.  The train was hauling Bakken crude oil. An unknown amount of crude oil was released into Armstrong Creek which feeds into the Kanawha River. Initially, the derailed train cars caused a huge fire, but the fire has been extinguished at this time. The towns of Adena Village and Boomer Bottom have both been evacuated (evacuation of 1 mile radius from derailment). The area has heavy snow and extremely cold temperatures.  USCG Sector Ohio Valley has requested on-scene NOAA SSC support.
On February 16, 2015, the 81-foot fishing vessel Savannah Ray went hard aground on the southeast coast of Long Island, in Chiniak Bay, near Kodiak, Alaska. Six crew members airlifted off by USCG helo. USCG requested NOAA SSC to provide resources at risk analysis.
On February 10, 2015, the Shell refinery in Martinez, CA reported a spill of crude oil from a line undergoing hydrostatic testing.  The release occurred near the seaward end of the Shell pier, where fixed containment boom is maintained.  Response contractors were on-scene before sunset and applied additional containment boom and deployed skimmers.  USCG Sector San Francisco requested trajectory support.
On February 6, 2015, the EPA requested denatured ethanol fate and trajectory associated with the CPR Train Derailment.  The CPR Train Derailment occurred on February 4, 2015, along the banks of the Mississippi River approximately 10 miles north of Dubuque, Iowa, near the city of Balltown.
On February 2, 2015, the USCG Port Arthur notified the NOAA SSC of an intermittent appearance of a sheen in the vicinity of an abandoned pipeline in the High Island block, near Sabine Pass, Texas. USCG requested a review of available data to determine if there have been recurring reports of sheen in the vicinity that may be attributed to an unknown source.
On January 23, 2015, the EPA contacted ERD requesting oil fate and trajectory for the Bridger Pipeline Release.  The Bridge Pipeline Release occurred on January 17, 2015, in the Yellowstone River approximately seven river miles upstream of the city of Glendive in Dawson County.
On January 20, 2015, USCG was notified that the 71-foot F/V Eyak grounded off ofCalligan Island, on its way back to Sitka, Alaska. The vessel was carrying approximately 800 gallons of diesel and 200 gallons of gasoline. No discharge has been reported yet, but there has been bad weather and the vessel rolled after the vents were plugged. USCG requested weather, oil fate and trajectory analysis.
On January 14, 2015 Hillcorp Energy experienced a crude oil leak from a 4" pipeline located in Bastain Bay, Port Sulphur, LA.  Reported amount released was 0.5 barrels, and source has been secured.  Sector NOLA has a team enroute, and has requested a trajectory.
At 1130 on January 6, 2015, USCG Sector Mobile notified NOAA SSC that a barge carrying 1,400 tons of Adiponitrile struck the Nehoela Bridge on the Tombigbee River and sustained minor damage. The barge has been pushed into the bank is being lightered and no chemical has been released.  USCG requested trajectory for worst case discharge (WCD).
On December 26, 2014, the Bulk Carrier MV GB Corrado grounded south and west of the Matagorda Shipping Channel.  She is carrying a load of bauxite (49,389 MT), and fuel (32,130 gallons diesel and 175,788 gallons # 6 ).  Cargo and fuel currently secure, with no releases.  Salvage planning and operations underway.  Sector Corpus contacted NOAA SSC with request for trajectory should release occur during salvage.
On December 12, 2014, the USCG Sector NOLA notified the NOAA SSC of a crude oil pipeline leak in Garden Island Bay, Louisiana (NRC#1103268) and requested a trajectory and resources at risk analysis.  20-40 barrels of Sweet Louisiana Crude was released from a 4-in pipeline. Pipeline has been shut in, and response assets are on-scene.
On December 11, 2014, the USCG was notified through the NRC of a sheen in the proximity of Naval Weapons Station Earle, Leonardo, NJ. The USCG Sector NY dispatched a patrol boat to the scene and Pollution Response team to investigate. Investigation is underway to determine the source. NOAA has been asked to provide hindcast and trajectory model for the slick.
On December 9, 2014, the oil tanker "Southern Star 7" sank in a river in Bangladesh after being struck by the freighter M/V Total.  Heavy fuel oil from the tanker has contaminated the Sundarbans region of southwestern Bangladesh, a UNESCO World Heritage Site that includes many wildlife refuges and protected areas.  NOAA is part of a United Nations Development Program (UNDP) assessment team providing assistance. [SEP] UN-Bangladesh Press Release - 31Dec2014 [SEP] Oiled nipa (in Bengali, golpata; Nypa fruticans) along shoreline in the Sundarbans. This plant is used for thatching but only by permit and in season. When the leaves are harvested, the center (new shoot) and one side leaf must be left, otherwise the plant will die. Discussions are underway to decide the disposition of oiled nipa. Photo by G. Shigenaka, NOAA. [SEP] Mangrove seedlings with oiled leaves. Photo by G. Shigenaka, NOAA. [SEP] NOAA team surveying side channel to the Sela River, 24 December 2014. Photo by Zia Islam. [SEP] http://www.mpa.gov.bd/detail.php?op=tide&month=0 [SEP] UNDP Assessment - Summary of Findings 31Dec2014 (English ver) [SEP] Oiled water hyacinth and surface sheen on the Sela River, Sundarbans. Note the sediment loading in the river. Photo by G. Shigenaka, NOAA.
On the morning of Nov. 27, the U.S. Coast Guard was notified of a sighting by commercial aircraft. Three planes, flying between 24-37,000 feet, reported seeing a 6 mile by 1 mile red-brown patch on the water, approximately 76 miles north of the Dominican Republic, moving east. At this time, no Coast Guard assets are being deployed to investigate.
On November 26, 2014, the USCG notified the NOAA SSC of a 50 foot sailing vessel grounded on the east side of St Johns Island near Drunk Bay on Monday 24 November. The vessel has 300 gallons of diesel onboard. No pollution has been reported as of 0830 26 November 2014 but salvage actions are not safe at this time due to sea conditions on site. USCG requested information on oil fate and effects due to sensitivity of resources in the area and association with the National Park.
On October 27, 2014, the USCG MSU Houma contacted the NOAA SSC about a 100 barrel crude oil spill which occurred on 25OCT2014. The oil spill was caused by a pipeline rupture in a marsh habitat north of Grand Isle, LA. The source is secure and removal actions are underway. USCG called to consult NOAA about potential use of in-situ burning as a response strategy.
On October 20, 2014, the USCG Morgan City contacted the NOAA Hazmat Duty Officer regarding a reported mystery sheen located approximately 7 NM south of Timbalier Island, Louisiana.  (Gulf of Mexico). The sheen was reported by passing helicopter as an "unknown" source and was described as 3 miles long with a 100 x 200 ft patch of "black oil" near the center.  USCG has requested fate and trajectory information.
On October 19, 2014, the USCG Sector Columbia River called the NOAA SSC to report that a mystery spill with a strong diesel smell had been reported on the Naselle River, WA. USCG Sector Columbia River asked for a river forecast and potential downstream movement of the material.
On October 20, 2014, the USCG D17 notified the NOAA SSC that the 441-ft M/V SIMUSHIR (a Russian freighter) had lost propulsion, and was disabled and adrift near the Queen Charlotte Island in Northern British Columbia, Canada. The potential for pollution is 500 tonnes of bunker and 60 tonnes of diesel fuel. The main cargo is containerized box cargo. FOSC Sector Juneau has requested a trajectory to determine if potential spill could impact U.S. waters, shorelines, or resources.
On October 13, 2014, a tug carrying ~2,000 gallons of marine diesel capsized in Mobile Bay, AL.  Sector Mobile contacted the NOAA SSC and requested a trajectory.
On September 21, 2014, a 42' pleasure craft sank 9 miles ENE of Vieques Island, Puerto Rico. The pleasure craft sank with a maximum capcity of 250 gallons of diesel fuel and 2 gallons of lube oil in approximately 129 ft of water. The USCG Sector San Juan contacted NOAA ERD at 1120ET to request fate and trajectory analysis.
On September 14, 2014, the 65-foot yacht "Avalon" grounded and sank in Hood Canal, WA.  The vessel had an estimated 300 to 500 gallons of diesel fuel on board.
On September 11, 2014, the USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the Gulf SSC regarding a 30 bbl spill of crude oil from a production facility in Lake Salvador, LA. The release has been secured but not contained. Spill response personnel are in route and an overflight is being scheduled. USCG has requested initial trajectory.
On September 9, 2014, the NOAA SSC was notified of two oiled seals that were harvested on St Lawrence Island near Gambell, Alaska.  ADEC has requested NOAA assistance in analyzing the oil samples through the LSU Chemistry Lab.
On September 8, 2014, the USCG Sector Guam notified the NOAA SSC for Oceania that a 500 foot container ship, the M/V Paul Russ, ran aground in Tanapag Harbor in Saipan. The vessel has approximately 320,000 gallons of IFO 380 on board but there has been no release at this time. The vessel is reported to be hard aground but stable.
On September 2, 2014, USCG Sector Puget Sound notified NOAA ERD of an estimated 1000 gallon sheen of mixed diesel/hydraulic/motor oil in Salmon Bay of Ballard (Seattle), WA. An OSRO is on-scene and has the sheen partially boomed.
On August 27, 2014, the USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the NOAA SSC about an oil spill in Garden Island Bay, in the southeast end of the Mississippi River Delta. The oil spill was caused by a rupture in a 3 inch flowline directly below the associated wellhead’s shut off valves. The well was abandoned but the flowline contained residual oils. The USCG requested a Resources at Risk Report from NOAA.
On August 18, 2014 NOAA ERD was contacted by the Fulton County Emergency Services Disaster Agency for support for a natural gas release in Canton, IL. ESDA requested air plume models for a ruptured underground 10 inch pipeline. The volume, rate of flow and pipeline pressure were unknown at the time of notification. The SSC is providing support to the Director of ESDA as needed.
On August 14, 2014, the NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Savannah, Georgia, that a passing vessel had observed a mystery sheen of unknown origin or type about 100 miles offshore.  The USCG requested any available remote sensing imagery and photo interpretation.  The material was later identified as an algal bloom and not oil.
On August 12, 2014, at 10:25 PM, the MV Flag Gangos collided with MV Pamisos at the dock of the International Matex Terminal, breaking some hoses on the dock and a barge.  The Facility is near Mississippi River Mile Marker 97.2.  On August 13, at 1:10, Coast Guard notified the NOAA SSC that the collision had resulted in a discharge of approximately 20 barrels of #6 fuel oil into the River. (NRC#1092114).  The USCG requested an oil trajectory to support response operations
On August 7, 2014, Sector Mobile notified NOAA SSC that a barge carrying 1,500 tons of Adiponitrile was grounded and requested a trajectory.  No chemical has been released, and plans are to lighter the barge and refloat it.  Weather, tides, trajectory and toxicity information was provided.
On August 6, 2014, NOAA ERD opened a hotline report to capture general information regarding any pollution incidents and response activities in the Hawaii from the passage of Hurricane Iselle and Hurricane Julio through the Hawaiian Islands.
On 31 July, 2014, the NOAA SSC was notified by USEPA On Scene Coordinator (FOSC) of a tanker rollover and fire on the I-10 entrance ramp along the Causeway in Mobile, AL.  The tanker was carrying 2,000 gallons of diesel and 5,700 gallons of gasoline.  The majority of the fuel was consumed during the fire, but runoff from the accident did enter Mobile Bay (COTP Zone) through a storm drain.  The NOAA SSC has provided fate and effect information on spill to the FOSC
On July 30, 2014, the USCG Sector Guam notified the Oceania SSC that a 45-foot Japanese fishing vessel grounded on coral reef off Cocos Island, Guam at 0800 local time on July 30.  The quantity of diesel aboard is unclear, however no sheens were observed in the area at the time of the report.  The exact location of the grounding remains uncertain.  Access to the area has been limited by severe weather conditions. [SEP] Six stranded after Halong drives fishing boat aground Aug. 1, 2014 1:29 AM | Written by Malorie Paine Pacific Daily News  Six people were stranded on Cocos Island for nearly a day during Tropical Storm Halong after their tuna fishing boat ran aground. Take Maru 55, a 49-foot Japanese fishing vessel, was grounded on the west side of Cocos Island early Wednesday morning, said Lt. William White, spokesman for the U.S. Coast Guard. White said an emergency call was received around 8 a.m. Wind and rain from Tropical Storm Halong began to bombard the island early Wednesday morning. Its closest point of approach was about noon Wednesday, but rain continued yesterday. The vessel carried six crew members, who had to swim 700 yards from the vessel to safety at the Cocos Island Resort. They took shelter at the resort until the weather improved enough for rescue crews to arrive. The Guam Fire Department launched a rescue vessel at 6:15 a.m. yesterday and brought the crew over from Cocos Island. Investigators with the U.S. Coast Guard began interviewing members of the crew on the cause of the grounding yesterday, White said. Multiple agencies are working together to determine if the vessel will be salvageable and what the next course of action will be. However, White said crews most likely will not be able to access the vessel until early next week because of rough water conditions from Halong. "If the vessel is not salvageable, the unified command would work between local government agencies, federal agencies and the owner of the vessel to determine the next step of action," White said. According to the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission website, the tuna longliner, built in 1981, is owned by Naoto Shinzato, out of Okinawa, Japan. The vessel has a maximum crew of 10. In an attempt to prevent people from injuring themselves on the vessel, the Coast Guard installed a safety zone around the boat, White said.
On July 28, 2014, the USCG Port Arthur Texas contacted NOAA ERD regarding a suspected oil observation reported in a NESDIS Satellite Marine Pollution Surveillance Report issued at 18:36.  The NESDIS report indicated a potential oil sheen 11 by 1 miles in size located 130 miles SE of Galveston (28 20 12 N, 093 03 11 W). USCG requested trajectory prediction to locate where to send air reconnaissance in the morning.
On 15 July 2014 a private individual (fisherman) filed an National Response Center report after observing an oil approximately 48 miles offshore of Cape Lookout, NC. On July 17, 2014, a USCG C-130 aircraft flew over the site and confirmed the presence of a sheen in the same vicinity as that reported by the private individual.  Based on the location and the temporal and geographical persistence of the sheens, the oil is likely from a sunken wreck.  The USCG contacted the NOAA SSC to review historical information in NOAA databases on the many WWII era wrecks in the area.
On July 12th, 2014, a partially submerged 15 ft boat was reported off the Southern Oregon Coast about 20 nm NW of Brookings, Oregon.  It is believed to be from the Japan tsunami.
On the afternoon of July 2nd, 2014,an abandoned skiff was reported about 8 miles off Newport, Oregon.  It is assumed that this is another Japan tsunami debris item.
On July 2, 2014, the USCG Sector Puget Sound contacted the NOAA SSC regarding a recreational boat aground on a rocky beach near Tulalip, WA. The vessel had a potential of 25 gal. of gasoline on board, and, after the initial alert to the SSC, it was determined this all leaked out when it initially hit the shore. USCG requested information on environmentally sensitive areas.
On June 30, 2014, the USCG Sector Sault Ste Marie requested trajectories for two mystery sheens located in northern Lake Huron.  The product type and volume are unknown.
At approximately 1515 on 27June2014, NOAA was notified that the 40ft fishing trawler "Terry Lee" ran aground at the west end of Jones Beach State Park, NY while returning from a fishing trip. It has broken apart and spilled diesel fuel onto the beach and into the water. The USCG and NY DEC are responding.
On Sunday, June 15, an estimated 40 - 50 ft boat was seen adrift off the Cape Perpetua, on the Oregon coast.  The mostly submerged hull is encrusted with heavy marine growth and it is assumed that this debris from the Japan tsunami.  USCG issued a notice to mariners and requested a drift trajectory from NOAA.
On June 7, 2014, the NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Sector NOLA of a 20 barrel spill in a marsh near Port Sulphur, LA.  NOAA provided resources at risk analysis and marsh cleanup endpoints.
On June 3, 2014, the USCG notified the NOAA SSC of a leaking underwater natural gas supply line near Nikiski, AK.  The USCG requested scientific support to help establish a safety zone while the leak is repaired.
On May 28, 2014, the USCG Sector New Orleans notified the NOAA SSC about an unknown amount of crude oil discharged from a pipeline in the Delta National Wildlife Refuge, approximately 9 miles southeast of Venice, LA.
On May 27, 2014, the NOAA Marine Debris Program requested a trajectory analysis for an upside-down 18 ft boat reported floating 8 miles off the Queets River in Washington State.  The boat is likely debris from the 2011 Japan tsunami.
On May 23, 2014, the NMFS  Stranding Coordinator contacted ERD to request a drift estimate for a 22 foot Humpback whale (Megaptera novaeangliae) carcass that had washed up at the entrance to Pillar Point Harbor, CA.
On May 22, 2014, the USCG Sector Mobile notified the NOAA SSC of a collision involving two semi-trailer trucks near Mobile, AL, that resulted in a fire and possible release of motor oil, cooking oil and grease packaged in crates, drums and barrels, and other truck cargo unknown. USCG has requested spill trajectory and oil fate and behavior information.
On May 21, 2014, the National Marine Fisheries Service contacted the Emergency Response Division with request for trajectory support for a stranded whale carcass
At 0430 on May 14, the F/V Devon struck a rock while traveling up the Nushagak River, Alaska, puncturing a fuel tank. 2,000 gallon diesel fuel spilled into the Nushagak River, approximately 12 miles upriver from Dillingham.   The remainder of the fuel was transferred to a void space on the vessel; the vessel has returned to Dillingham.
On May 7, 2014, at At approximately 1:00 pm (CST) Sector NOLA contacted the NOAA SSC regarding an unknown sheen in Mississippi Cannyon Block 61. Coast Guard overflight at 1330 (CST) identified an overall impacted area approximately 20-30 miles long and 8 miles wide from Mississippi Canyon, Block 21 to Main Pass, Block 41 in the Gulf of Mexico. US Coast Guard requested a trajectory, and, if possible, some indication as to source, based on information from the overflght.
On the afternoon of 30 April 2014, an estimated 18 cars of a CSX train, carrying Bakken crude oil, derailed in the City of Lynchburg, which caused an intense fire.  The fire have been extinguished.  Three of the cars fell into the James River and are laying on the bank of the river.  There is an estimated 10,000 to 23,000 gallons of oil in the river, depending on how much oil was consumed in the fire.
On April 25th, 2014, the USCG Marine safety Unit in Lake Charles, LA,  contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a mystery sheen which was reported by Calcasieu Ship Pilots at 1400 local time. The sheen was described as being within a 5 mi radius, with the majority being patchy and silvery - dark oil being in the middle covering a 1/4 mi by 100 ft area. NOAA provided a trajectory to guide aerial survey efforts.
On April 16, 2014, the USCG District 7 notified the NOAA SSC of a pollution incident 0.6NMi east of Government Cut near the port of Miami. The evening of April 15, the Tug Neptune reported that an on-board diesel tank had been punctured and up to 2000 gal of diesel had been discharged into the water.
On April 15, 2014, the USCG MSU Texas City contacted NOAA ERD to report a mobile floating drilling unit was hit by a large wave and was listing to one side. The Blowout Preventer (BOP) is shutting in the well. The MODU is 112 miles SE of Galveston Bay in the Gulf of Mexico in 4000' of water. NOAA ERD has provided on-scene weather forecast and a trajectory in the event of a discharge.
On April 15, 2014, the MSU Paducah (USCG) contacted NOAA ERD regarding 2 oil barges aground on the upper Mississippi River (Mile Marker 83.5) near Grand Tower, Illinois.  The barges grounded on April 9, and the barges are not currently leaking, but dropping water levels have increased the stress on the barges, and the USCG is requesting support for this potential incident.  Each barge is laden with 15,000 bbls of low API (non-floating) oil.
On April 4, 2014, the USCG New Orleans contacted the NOAA SSC regarding a release of 6 barrels (bbls) of crude oil from a 4 inch transfer line into a marsh approximately 1/4 mile east of the Barataria Bay Waterway.  The responsible party has reportedly secured and flushed the line and deployed boom around the spill.  Oil spill contractors are deploying to the incident to conduct cleanup operations. USCG has requested trajectory from NOAA ERD.
On 24 March, 2014, the USCG Sector Hampton Roads notified the NOAA SSC about a Methyl Ethyl Ketone chemical spill from Honeywell International, Hopewell, Virginia.  The release took place on 22 March and the NRC was notified on 24 March. An estimated 7900 pounds of methyl ethyl ketone spilled into the Gravelly Run Creek through a waste water outfall.  Cause was reported to be a faulty control discharge valve. USCG requesting Resources at Risk and information on the chemical.
On March 22, 2014, the USCG Sector Houston-Galveston (MSU Texas City) notified the NOAA SSC that the 585 foot bulk carrier 'M/V Summer Wind' collided with an oil tank-barge, containing 924,000 gallons of fuel oil. The tank barge was towed by the 'M/V Miss Susan' and owned by Kirby Inland Marine. The collision occurred  in Galveston Bay near the Texas City dike on Saturday March 22 at approximately 12:30 p.m. The cargo of the barge, an intermediate fuel oil (RMG-380), has been spilled.  The USCG has requested on-scene support from NOAA to provide trajectories, shoreline assessment, common operational picture, overflight, weather, and natural resource information services. The Texas General Land Office and other agencies are responding. [SEP] silver, rainbow sheen with brown oil The Gulf of Mexico is on the horizon with west jetty on right side of image. altitude 600 to 300 feet USCG-NOAA Overflight March 24, 2014 0837 to 1036 Source: NOAA (DSB) [SEP] JIC Update 1: Matagorda Bay [SEP] NWS March 26 1400 forecast [SEP] A report by: Texas A&M Transportation Institute PRC 14-31-F October 2014 [SEP] http://www.nws.noaa.gov/tdl/etsurge/index.php?page=stn&region=gm&datum=msl&list=&map=0-48&type=graph&stn=txgalv Go here for NWS water level forecast for Galveston and Corpus Christi [SEP] Forecasts for Galveston and Matagorda Bays added. By Wednesday, winds expected to strengthen and come from the southeast (onshore). [SEP] NWS March 28 2000 forecast [SEP] JIC Update 3: Matagorda Bay [SEP] Starting Monday, March 31, all updates on the Texas City "Y" oil spill response in Galveston and Matagorda Counties automatically appear in the "Area News" column on the left side of the Home page on the Central Texas Coastal Area Committee (CTCAC) website at: http://www.ctcac.us To prevent duplicate emails, CTCAC has now discontinued its email re-distribution of updates issued by the Joint Information Center for the Texas City "Y" response. If you would like to subscribe to receive updates on the Texas City "Y" oil spill response by email, please visit the Texas City "Y" Response website at: http://texascityyresponse.com Scroll over the "Questions/Comments" link on the menu bar, and click "Join Mailing List". Fill in the boxes and click "Submit" to be added to the JIC's email mailing list. CTCAC will continue to email its registered volunteers any updates on volunteer opportunities and assignments, such as the "Sentinel" program conducting shoreline assessments for oiled beaches, birds and wildlife on Galveston Island. Volunteer updates and assignments will be emailed to volunteers and posted under the "Recent Updates" column on the right side of the Home page on the CTCAC website at: http://www.ctcac.us For more information about CTCAC's Volunteer Workgroup, scroll over "About Us" on the CTCAC menu bar, and click on "Volunteer". Thank you to all 949 persons who have already registered as potential volunteers. No additional volunteers are needed or being accepted at this time. If more volunteers are needed later, a request will be posted on the CTCAC website. [SEP] Press Release: Volunteer "Sentinels" to conduct shoreline assessments [SEP] A barge loaded with marine fuel oil sits partially submerged in the Houston Ship Channel, March 22, 2014. The bulk carrier Summer Wind, reported a collision between the Summer Wind and a barge, containing 924,000 gallons of fuel oil, towed by the motor vessel Miss Susan. Photo credit: USCG [SEP] NWS March 27 0500 forecast
On March 19, 2014, Sector NOLA contacted the NOAA SSC regarding a leaking pipeline near Southwest Pass, LA., (NRC#1076793), and requested a resources at risk for the area.  Currently, there is no product in the water, and what has been released is contained in a bermed area.  Specific source has not yet been identified.  Initially source was thought to be an abandoned tank, but now appears to be a leaking pipeline. A resources at risk analysis was prepared and provided to Coast Guard.
On March 9, 2014, the USCG New Orleans contacted the NOAA SSC about a leaking flowline on an unmanned facility located in West Delta Block 83, between the Lower Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico about 4 miles northeast of the entrance to Southwest Pass, south of Venice, Louisiana.  An estimated 15-30 barrels (bbls) of crude oil was discharged. The source was secured at 0645 on 9 MAR by shutting in the flowline.   Cleanup operations are ongoing.
On March 21, 2014, the USCG Marine Safety Unit Texas City contacted the NOAA SSC about a release of approximately 70,000 lbs of phenol into a retention pond. The release occurred because of a failed pipeline. The facility uses this retention pond as an intermediary holding place prior to releasing waste water into the Brazos River.  USCG requested toxicity information about phenol, fate and effects, and resources at risk.
On February 22, 2014, USCG Sector New Orleans (NOLA) contacted the NOAA SSC regarding an oil spill on the Lower Mississippi River.  At approximately 15:30 Central Time, the Tank Barge E2MS 303 collided with the towboat Lindsay Ann Erickson, which was pushing grain barges and was moving out of the shipping lane and into a fleeting area.  The Tank Barge was being pushed by the Towboat Hannah C. Settoon.  The collision occurred at mile marker 153.7 on the Lower Mississippi River.  The collision resulted in a gash in one tank, which released crude oil into the river.  The tank is reported to contain Bakken crude oil.  Reports of actual amount of oil discharged are not yet available.  USCG requested for trajectories for both the breached tank and the full potential (25,000 barrels) of all tanks. [SEP] Coast Guard photo, 2/22/14 [SEP] Photo Credit: USCG Overflight photo (close-up) of ACL fleeting area MM 151. Only silver sheen observed today. [SEP] Photo Credit: USCG [SEP] Photo Credit: NOAA Sheen floating into collection area between terminal dry dock and right descending bank about a mile south of spill site and just downstream from barge fleeting decon. [SEP] Update 3: Coast Guard responds to barge collision on lower Mississippi River NEW ORLEANS ???€? The Mississippi River has reopened with restrictions as of approximately 1:30 p.m. as the Unified Command continues response operations in connection with the E2MS 303 incident near Vacherie, Monday. A successful flight with unified command, state and federal on-scene coordinators, conducted a comprehensive assessment of the affected portion of the river and determined the river was safe to transit with restrictions. Mariners must comply with a broadcast notice to being issued for river transits by the Coast Guard. It is calculated that approximately 31,500 gallons of light crude oil was discharged from the collision of the E2MS 303 tank barge and the motor vessel Lindsay Ann Erickson, a towing vessel, into the waterway Saturday. Response crews with Environmental Safety & Health, an oil spill removal organization, has strategically deployed containment boom to protect the water intakes for three parishes in the affected area. All impacted water intake facilities in the affected area are taking precautionary measures to prevent contamination. The unified command has confirmed with local officials that there are no impacts to drinking water. The Center for Toxicology and Environmental Health is conducting air monitoring for air pollution threats. No exposure concerns to the public have been detected through this monitoring. The unified command consists of the Coast Guard, Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator???€?s Office, Environmental Safety & Health and Forefront Emergency Management. Also responding are representatives from Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, and with participation from the Governor's Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness along with St James and St John the Baptist parishes. There are currently no reports of oiled wildlife. "Our highest priorities in this response are the safety of the public and responders, and protection of the environment, said Coast Guard Cmdr. Rebecca Ore, E2MS 303 Incident Commander. The cause of the incident is under investigation. A hotline for media has been established to call at the Joint Information Center. The number is (985) 379-6954. ### Date: Feb 24, 2014 Contact: Joint Information Center Office: (985) 379-6954 [SEP] Photo Credit: NOAA [SEP] Photo Credit: USCG Reported as heaviest oiled area downstream of source [SEP] From Adam We collected product sample, recovered product sample from the slop tank, and sample from the water of emulsified with lots of susp solids. All was analyzed by Scott (see attached) and sent to Robert, Tarpley, and Farr. They are collecting another sample today where they found one little piece of oil hiding out amongst the barges as they were pulling the last ones apart. Scott is gonna analyze that tomorrow. Furthest downstream recoverable oil was at the barge fleet (235 barges tied up along shoreline) about 1-2 miles downstream (acted as collection point). No shoreline impacts were observed other than a small area immediately adjoining the spill site, where the barge pulled to shore after collision. Everything else quickly dispersed and turned to sheen. Nothing but silver sheen after first couple of miles, and even that disappeared after 60 or so miles. Appears that the oil was readily dispersed by river.
On On February 21, 2014, the USCG Marine Safety Unit in Texas City, TX, contacted the NOAA SSC about a leaking pipeline on an abandoned platform in High Island Block 98L, about 8 miles off Bolivar Point, TX. During routine operations, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) noticed a sheen and investigated. BSEE personnel landed their helicopter on the abandoned platform to discover 50 psi pressure on the abandoned well. A 1 inch pipeline on the platform is leaking and currently causing a 3-4 mile sheen. USCG contact NOAA to request a trajectory for this incident.
On February 20 2014, the USCG Sector New Orleans notified NOAA SSC about a Mystery Sheen in Black Bay, in St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana. The sheen is 3.5 miles by 300 yrds with 70 % cover of mostly rainbow sheen. Upon further investigation, a suspected source was identified, but no Responsible Party is taking ownership of the sheen. USCG has requested a hindcast (reverse trajectory) to help determine the source.
USCG Sector North Carolina contacted SSC this evening at 2145 hours.  Sector North Carolina is currently working a search and rescue case for a fishing vessel, the F/V Lauren Dorothy II, taking on water approximately 46 miles offshore of Wrightsville Beach, NC.  The vessel is expected to sink in the vicinity of 36-25N 074-44W with approx 1600 gallons of diesel on board. [SEP] This is the last update I received from USCG Sector North Carolina. A CG HH60 hoisted the two crew members and left the vessel adrift and taking on water. Last report was that the vessel would not remain afloat long due to rate of flooding. Vessel eventually sank in 284 fathoms of water approximately 54 NM off of Oregon Inlet, in the vicinity of the position that USCG provided when requested trajectory. At time of SAR, winds were 40 kts; seas 12-14 ft; visibility 8NM; Air temp 38F; water temp 52F. No further NOAA SSC support requested.
On February 13, 2014, the USCG Sector Guam notified the NOAA SSC that a Japanese long-liner, the DAIKI MARU 7, had grounded at 1725 local time at the entrance to Apra Harbor in Guam.  The vessel has an estimated 5100 gallons of diesel aboard, as well as small amounts of lube oil and hydraulic fuel. Oil has reportedly been discharged, however the exact time and amount of release are unknown at this time. USCG Sector Guam, in support of DOD, requested information on the likely oil movement and trajectory. The grounding has potential to significantly impact corals.  There are sea turtles in the area and the grounding location is adjacent to a sea turtle nesting beach at the base of Spanish Steps. [SEP] SANTA RITA, Guam (Feb. 14, 2014) The Japanese commercial fishing vessel Daiki Maru can be seen from Orote Point on U.S. Naval Base Guam. Sailors from Helicopter Sea Combat Squadron (HSC) 25 conducted a search-and-rescue operation and rescued 10 fishermen from the sinking vessel that ran aground near Spanish Steps Feb. 13. The fishermen were transported to U.S. Naval Hospital Guam for evaluation and later released. (U.S. Navy photo by Lt. Matt Knight/Released) [SEP] The Japanese commercial fishing vessel Daiki Maru, foreground, can be seen from Orote Point on U.S. Naval Base Guam. Sailors from Helicopter Sea Combat Squadron (HSC) 25 conducted a search-and-rescue operation and rescued 10 fishermen from the sinking vessel that ran aground near Spanish Steps Feb. 13. The fishermen were transported to U.S. Naval Hospital Guam for evaluation and later released. U.S. Navy photo by Lt. Matt Knight (Released) 140214-N-XT725-004
On February 11, 2014,  the NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Sector Puget Sound of a slick in the Hood Canal, near the Hood Canal bridge. The slick was eventually connected to Naval Base Kitsap, which had a spill incident on 10 Feb. The spill was initially reported as 100-150 gallons, later revised to 2000 gallons, of oily water from a failure in the transfer system on the pier on the afternoon of Feb. 10. The USCG requested weather, tides and currents.
About midnight on January 31, 2014, the M/V Commander, a 221 foot RO/RO (roll-on, roll-off) vessel ran aground on a reef outside the channel in Gallows Bay near Christiansted, St Croix, USVI.  The vessel has 5000 gallons of diesel fuel onboard. No spill has been reported.  USCG is working with salvers on a plan to refloat the vessel. NOAA SSC is helping to coordinate consultation issues with DOI, USFWS, SHPO, and NMFS.  NOAA is also providing initial trajectory, oil fate, and weather information.
On December 27, 2013, the Coast Guard notified the NOAA SSC of a small crude oil spill in Barataria Bay, Louisiana.  A faulty valve on a pipeline resulted in the release of approximately 2 barrels of crude oil into a marshy containment area surrounding a pigging station. Some of the product had been drawn into the adjacent waterway by tidal action, staining the wrack line and filling the rip-rap. Clean-up activities are underway and expected to continue through Dec 28.
On December 23, 2013, USCG notified the NOAA Emergency Response Division of a barge accident near Texas City, TX.  The Tug LAKES CHARLES, pushing two barges, collided with the Tug ALEX D, pushing 3 barges. The incident occurred approximately 22 miles west of the High Island bridge on the Intracoastal Waterway.  Two barges were damaged. A barge containing Calcium Chloride solution was successfully lightered on Dec 24th, with no release of product. A double-hulled barge carrying crude oil was also damaged but mo crude oil was released.
On December 20, 2014, the NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Sector Delaware Bay that the sailing vessel Tiffany (a 47 foot sailboat) had run aground on the Atlantic Ocean jetty near the entrance to the Cape May Canal. The owner reported that the sailboat has 250 gallons of diesel fuel aboard.  The location of the grounding is adjacent to the Cape May National Wildlife Refuge.
On December 19, 2013, the USCG District 14 contacted the NOAA SSC for Oceania to request a trajectory analysis for potential release of oil from a refrigerated fish carrier, the PING DA 7, which grounded the prior week on a fringing reef on the north side of Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM).  USCG D14 has been monitoring the status of the Pohnpei State/FSM government response to the Chinese-owned, Kiribati-flagged vessel, although to date there has been no request for USCG assistance.  The vessel is reportedly carrying 75 metric tonnes of IFO 180, 75 metric tonnes of Marine Gas Oil, and 8 metric tonnes of lube oil.
On 15 December 2013, the NW SSC was alerted by Sector Columbia River of the F/V Nat that sunk south of the South Jetty for the entrance to Newport, OR at approximately 1900 14 December 2013. There is currently no discharge, but there is a potential of 600 gallons of diesel. Salvage crews will be removing the fuel on 12/15, and vessel salvage operations will begin at some point in the near future. The USCG has asked the SSC for a worst case discharge trajectory, fate of potential release, and for notifications to the state and federal natural resource trustees
On November 18, 2013, the M/V CSL Niagara grounded while approaching Sandusky Bay, OH. Severe storms caused a seiche in Lake Erie.  The National Weather Service Detroit predicted a 7.5 ft drop in water levels for western Lake Erie. No discharge was reported but USCG requested a precautionary worst case discharge trajectory for instantaneous release of 145.46 metric tons of IFO 60 and 47.69 metric tons of diesel fuel  The MSU also requested a prediction when water level will return to normal to refloat the vessel.
On November 12, 2013, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC about a mystery sheen reported in Quarantine Bay, 8 miles north of Buras, LA. The sheen appears to be from a pipeline near a decommissioned platform. The overflight estimated that 200 gallons of crude oil is on the surface, creating a sheen of 3 miles by 3/4 miles. USCG is requesting a trajectory from NOAA at this time to determine potential shoreline and resource impacts.
Early on Friday November 8, 2013, a 90 car unit train carrying crude oil enroute from Amory, Mississippi to Walnut Hill, Florida derailed near Aliceville, Al. Twenty six (26) tanker cars filled with crude oil derailed into a wetland slough at the head waters of on a tributary of Lubbub Creek.  Lubbub Creek discharges into the Tombigbee River.  Shortly after the derailment the rail cars began discharging oil and then caught fire.
On November 1, 2013 the USCG MSD Dutch Harbor notified the NOAA Alaska SSC the F/V Arctic Hunter grounded in Unalaska Bay, approximately 6 nautical miles from Dutch Harbor.  The vessel is taking on water and an estimated 15,000 gallons diesel fuel is onboard. The crew safely abandoned the vessel and were rescued by the crews of F/V Bristol and F/V Saga.
On October 31, 2013 the USCG Sector New Orleans notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator regarding a discharge of crude oil from the Romere Pass 59 well. An estimated 3-5 barrels was released within the Delta National Wildlife Refuge. The leaked was contained by shutting down the wellhead at the surface.
On October 26, 2013, the USCG Sector Boston notified the NOAA SSC of a fishing boat sinking approximately 4 miles east of Rockport, MA. All hands on board were recovered, though hospitalized. Initial reports, 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel on board.
At 1800 PDT on 16 Oct 2013, USCG contacted NOAA Emergency Response Division about a mystery sheen reported at 1630 PDT.  The description was 1 mile by 100 yards with patches of black and brown oil.
On October 11, 2013 the USCG Sector New Orleans notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator about a mystery sheen in Breton Sound. A good samaritan who was flying over Breton Sound reported the sheen to the USCG at 11:30 CT. The sheen is described as 1 mile by 5 mile of which 10% is black oil.
At 1000ET on 10 Oct 2013, USCG contacted NOAA Emergency Response Division about a 46ft wooden fishing boat aground on Wasque Shoal in Muskeget Channel, MA near Martha's Vineyard. The vessel's anchor failed overnight and grounded this morning. The vessel is listing in 3 feet of water and fuel vents have been plugged.
On September 13, 2013, USCG District 14 notified the SSC for the Pacific Islands that two 60-foot fishing vessels had grounded on Tinian Island. Both vessels grounded along the south shore of Kammer Reef, just south of Tinian’s Harbor.  USCG Sector Guam, CNMI Department of Public Safety, and CNMI DEQ are responding.  One vessel has already been safely refloated.  The vessel remaining aground, the IL SIN HO, is reported to have an unspecified quantity of fuel and oily bilge water onboard.  The responsible party has taken responsibility and is putting together a fuel removal and salvage plan for submission to USCG Sector Guam for review and approval.  NOAA NMFS coral and restoration experts are engaged with the response and providing guidance to minimize damage to coral during salvage operations.
At approximately 0915 on 6 September 2013 USCG Sector Columbia River contacted the NOAA SSC regarding the 55 ft. F/V ANDRIANNA aground 1/3 mile south of the southern breakwater at the entrance to Grays Harbor, WA. Potential release of 1200 gallons of diesel, however, no release has yet been reported. All crew are safe. USCG requested trajectory and fate support.
On September 4, 2013, USCG Sector Anchorage notified the NOAA SSC that the Sailing Vessel S/V Perd Pas Le Nord was soft aground on a shoal in Peard Bay, Alaska,  approximately 30 miles NE of Wainwright or 40 miles SW of Barrow, Alaska. The vessel has 200 gallons of diesel on board. The owner is currently working to facilitate removing the steel-hulled vessel from the shoal.
On August 27, 2013, USCG reported that tarballs from an unknown source began showing up on shore near Cape Canaveral, FL along 12-15 miles of the National Seashore early on 27 August, 2013.  NOAA was asked to evaluate possible source locations. USCG is investigating and responding to the incident.
On August 22,2013 the USCG Marine Safety Unit in Port Arthur, TX contacted the NOAA SSC to request a trajectory for a reported oil slick 15 miles south-southeast of the Calcasieu River Pass. It is not clear at this time if the material of the reported slick is actual oil or biological substance.
On August 21, 2013 the USCG Sector Puget Sound notified the NOAA SSC of a grounded 21 foot bayliner vessel at the mouth of Sekiu River, WA.  The vessel grounded in fog at approximately 7:00pm/PDT on August 20, 2013. The USCG requested information on environmental sensitivities in the area.  There is no fuel leaking from the vessel at this time.
At approximately 1130 PM EDT on Aug. 13, 2013, the tug "Doris Moran"  lost power and it's tow, the barge "Alexandra," colliding with it in Buzzards Bay Massachusetts.  The barge was carrying 6,000 tons of cement powder.  There were no reports significant damage or pollution from the tug, but the barge was taking on water.  USCG is on-scene and salvage efforts are underway. The NOAA scientific support coordinator is consulting with the USCG.
On 8 August 2013, USCG Sector Key West contacted NOAA ERD regarding a small plane crash approximately 1.4 miles off Isla Morada, FL (25-18N 80-18W). The plane crashed at approximately 1630 local time and had an estimated fuel capacity of 26 gallons of 80/87 Octane fuel. The USCG requested fate and trajectory of the fuel.
On 29 July, 2013, the luxury yacht "Feeling Free" (112 foot, 203 gross tons) grounded in Woods Hole passage, MA. She has a fuel capacity of 5500 gallons of diesel and reports 3123 gallons on board. No pollution is reported. USCG crews are en-route. Salvage options are being considered. NOAA is examining resources at risk in the area and providing telephone support to the Coast Guard.
On 28 July 2013, USCG was notified of a minor oil spill in the Mississippi R. delta just south of Lafitte, LA. A pinhole leak at a small production facility allowed a section of 2 1/2" flow line to discharge an unknown amount of crude oil, but a maximum potential for the spill was 40 to 50 BBL. The source is secured and cleanup had been started as of the afternoon of 28 July.
On July 23, 2013, NOAA ERD was notified of a well blowout & evacuation of personnel from the rig Hercules 265. This jackup rig is located 40NM south of Timbalier Bay, LA in South Timbalier Block 220. The well is predominantly natural gas, no report of sheen currently from USCG overflight, worst case discharge is 118 bbls of liquid/day (gas+oil+condensate).
USCG Sector New Orleans called the NOAA SSC just for notification to NOAA of an ongoing underground pipeline leak in the marshes near South Pass. This is the NRC notification #1054036, and the volume was reported as 22 gal of crude.
On 10 July, 2013, USCG Sector SE New England contacted the NOAA SSC regarding the 36' sailing boat "Running Free" that grounded on Marthas Vineyard, MA after being abandoned at sea in early May off Bermuda. While the vessel was not a pollution hazard, it grounded near an active colony of nesting roseate terns (state & federally endangered species).
On 9 July 2013, the USCG Morgan City Marine Safety Unit contacted the NOAA SSC requesting trajectory support for an uncontrolled release from a wellhead located in Louisiana’s Ship Shoal Block 225, approximately 45 miles offshore. Natural gas and crude oil was reported as being released from the wellhead.  Rainbow sheen is reported as 5 miles by ¼ miles.  NOAA is currently providing scientific and weather support to the USCG.
On July 6, 2013 the USCG Sector Anchorage notified the NOAA SSC of the FV Naknek Spirit grounding in Poe Bay, Prince William Sound.  The 104 foot long fishing processor spilled an estimated 500 gallons of diesel and sheening has been reported.  There was 10,000 gallons of diesel, 1200 gallons of gasoline, 75 gallons lube oil, and 100 gallons of hydraulic fluid on board.  The Responsible Party has assumed full control and responsibility for the incident. All remaining fuel has been pumped into other tanks on the vessel.  USCG estimates the vessel may float free at next high tide.  USCG on scene and resource agencies have been notified. In fact, the vessel did float free on the next high tide, and motored via its own power back to Whittier. Case closed
small single engine aircraft crashed near shoreline early afternoon 23 June 2013 at Dorado Beach, Puerto Rico.  Reported fuel onboard was 30 gallons of 100 octane avgas.  PRDNER reports plane is on a reef and pilot was taken to hospital.  USCG investigators are enroute to scene. NMFS, PRDNER and USFWS have been notified.
USCG Sector Puget Sound notified the NOAA NWRRT representative and NOAA SSC that the F/V Neahkanie ran aground early this morning, 4 June 2013, north of Lagoon Point on Whidbey Island in Washington.  No fuel has been released from the 97-foot long vessel and USCG indicated the risk of release is low. The potential aboard the vessel is 5000-7000 gallons of diesel.  USCG has requested a trajectory for a worst-case scenario discharge of 7000 gallons of diesel and the weather forecast.
This afternoon USCG Sector Baltimore notified the NOAA SSC that the Tug Boat KALEEN MCALLISTER struck an unidentified object in Baltimore Harbor and sank. Vessel has onboard between 18,000-22,000 gallons of diesel fuel. A surface sheen has been observed. USCG requested NOAA to provide trajectory in aniticipation of a worst case release in anticipation of raising the vessel. See hotline for further information.
At about 1600 ADT on April 25th, an overflight reported a 12 mile slick oriented N to S and about 5-6 miles off the SW tip of Puerto Rico.  Reported coordinates are 17d 54.7'N by 67d 18.2'W for the northern tip, and 17d 43.6'N by 67d 18.2' W.Photos show a brown substance in the water with no sheen.  Winds were 5 - knots.
On 03APR, USCG MSU Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC about a release of zinc bromide by an offshore drilling vessel (NRC #1042785). The vessel was conducting operations when high winds forces an emergency disconnect and the solution was released at depth of 4,700 ft below surface. The incident occurred 120 miles offshore, in Green Canyon Block 727. Reports claim quantities between 550 and 1652 bbls of solution was released. USCG is requesting information about potential environmental impacts and potential area of impact due to this release.
On 12MAR, USCG MSU Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a report of a mystery sheen, 5mi by 100 yrd, with 50% cover of rainbow and silver sheen. The sheen was reported by a platform in Timbalier Block 30 after witnessing a vessel transit the area. The sheen appears to be traveling west. The product chemistry and quantity is not known. USCG is requesting a trajectory from NOAA.
On 12MAR, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a tug/barge collision with a natural gas pipeline which has resulted in a 100 ft tall fire and four injuries, one severe. The incident occurred in Bayou Perot outside Lafitte, LA. The barge contained 2215 bbl crude oil and the tug contained 1000 gl diesel. The tug and barge are currently on fire. USCG is requesting a trajectory to support pollution response operations as oil has already been sighted on the water. [SEP] http://www.d8.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/1722395/UPDATE-2-Coast-Guard-responds-to-allision-pipeline-fire-south-of-New-Orleans News Release Date: March 13, 2013 U.S. Coast Guard Eighth District External Affairs Contact: U.S. Coast Guard Heartland Office: (618) 225-9008 UPDATE 2: Coast Guard responds to allision, pipeline fire south of New Orleans *PHOTOS AND VIDEO AVAILABLE* NEW ORLEANS ???€? Responders continued to monitor and prepare salvage, firefighting and pollution contingencies for a tug and barge that allided with a pipeline near Bayou Perot 30 miles south of New Orleans Wednesday. The fire reportedly has reduced in size by approximately 30 percent, and there are no reports of oil in the water. Visual imagery intially indicated potential pockets of crude oil; however, those areas have been determined to be particulate ash from the liquefied natural gas burn off. Approximately 2,200 barrels of crude oil remain on board the barge and has not been compromised. A staging area has been established at the C & M Fuel Dock. The Coast Guard Gulf Strike Team have arrived on scene and are underway to check spill trajectory. There are approximately 40 response personnel on scene. [SEP] NEW ORLEANS ???€? The Coast Guard continues to respond to a report of an allision between a tug pushing a barge resulting in a pipeline fire near Bayou Perot 30 miles south of New Orleans, Wednesday. ES & H, the oil spill response organization, is on scene and has mobilized 7,218 feet of containment boom and 6,000 feet of 18-inch containment boom, one cabin boat, five responder class boats, one Marco skimmer and two 24-foot express hull vessels in response to the incident. There are 2,215 barrels of crude on the barge and approximately 1,000 gallons of diesel on the tug. A Coast Guard overflight is scheduled for 1 p.m. Wednesday to conduct shoreline impacts and assessments. There is a one mile by 75 foot-wide sheen reported in the vicinity of the tug and barge. The owner of the pipeline is Chevron, and the owner of the barge is Setoon Towing LLC. The pipeline was shut in Tuesday evening, and the fire will diminish as the product diminishes. All crew members were able to exit the tug; the captain reportedly suffered second to third-degree degree burns. Coast Guard Sector New Orleans watchstanders received a report that the 47-foot tug Shanon E. Settoon was pushing a 154-foot oil barge when it allided with a pipeline 6 p.m., Tuesday. The Coast Guard is working with federal, state and local agencies in response to this incident to ensure the safety of responders and contain and clean up any oil that is leaking. The Coast Guard is investigating the cause of the incident. [SEP] Overflight photo from 1500 on March 13th, 2013. SMI 572 Collision. Photographer: NOAA Kyle Jellison. [SEP] Overflight photo from 1500 on March 13th, 2013. SMI 572 Collision. NOAA Photographer: Kyle Jellison.
On 09MAR13, USCG MSU Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a mystery sheen reported in West Delta Block 80, 21 miles southeast of Grande Isle. The sheen is reported as 5 miles by 5 miles with 70% dark blue/brown and 30% light rainbow. USCG has requested a trajectory from NOAA.
On March 7, 2013 USCG Sector Puget Sound reported to the SSC that there are scattered, what appear to be lube oil balls on the South side of Robinson Park on Vashon Island, WA.
In the evening of 28-Feb-2013, the 628 foot M/V CHAMPION EXPRESS was reported adrift approximately 8NM West of Half Moon Bay, CA.  The loaded bulk cargo ship carrying liquid fertilizer had reported an engine leak that forced an engine shutdown.  At the time USCG contacted their NOAA SSC, she had been drifting for approximately 5 hours.  A tug was en route at the time of the call and expected to be on-scene in an hour or so.  USCG Sector SF requested a precautionary drift estimate of the ship in the event there is difficulty getting her under tow.   No pollution has been reported or is anticipated at this time.
On January 25, 2013 the 167 ft M/V HELENA STAR sank in the Hylebos Waterway in Tacoma, WA. The NOAA SSC has been requested to look at proposed salvage/clean-up actions in regards to possible affects to the surrounding environment.
On 26FEB13, USCG MSU Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC about a potential release from a drilling rig due to a collision with a salvage work boat. A drilling rig has been lifted and resting on the seabed for approximately two months waiting to be salvaged. A salvage company was recently hired and is starting to work on the vessel. The salvage work boat and the drilling rig are about to collide. The crew has been safely removed and USCG is concerned about a release of the remaining product on the drilling rig. USCG is requesting a trajectory for a diesel, lube oil and hydraulic fluid release.
On 26FEB13, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC in regards to an allision that occurred at 8:00 pm between a 42 ft. aluminum hull crew boat and an inactive wellhead in the Lake Washington Field in Lake Grande Ecaille (~11 miles due west of Empire, LA). Initial reports from personnel on scene estimate either crude oil, produced water, or natural gas is discharging from the well. The well has been shut in since December 2007 and no flow lines are attached. USCG is requesting a trajectory to support the morning operations.
On 15FEB13, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a potential release of crude oil and condensate from an exploratory well being drilled about 50 mi east of Venice, LA. There is concern about an underground flow of natural gas at the site and non-essential personnel have evacuated from the shallow-water platform. The well's blow-out preventer was successfully closed. There is currently no pollution release and operations are underway to fully secure the well. USCG requests a trajectory of the worse-case discharge as a precaution.
USCG Sector Guam contacted the SSC for the Pacific Islands to request oil spill trajectories in the event of a release of 112,000 gallons of heavy oil aboard a derelict barge in Apra Harbor, Guam.  The barge is currently stable, but USCG is concerned that there might be a release during storm conditions. USCG currently has boom deployed around the barge.
The NOAA Hazmat Duty Officer was contacted late morning on 27 Jan 13 for assistance with a barge discharging a light crude oil into the Mississippi River in the vicinity of Vickburg, MS after an allision with the Vicksburg, MS RR bridge at Mile Marker 437. The RR bridge is about 100 yards up river from the I-20 bridge, and is currently open after an initial inspection. The NOAA SSC was contacted at 11:45 am to support USCG Sector Lower Mississippi River (LMR). Sector LMR requested a trajectory to see how far the oil may have flowed down stream. [SEP] UPDATE: Coast Guard continues response to crude oil spill near Vicksburg NEW ORLEANS ???€? The unified command continues to respond to a crude oil spill in the lower Mississippi River near mile marker 436 in Vicksburg, Miss., Tuesday. A lightering and salvage plan has been approved and multiple response crews have been dispatched to begin removing oil from the damaged barge. Response crews have deployed 2,800-feet of boom to contain the source of the oil leak. Skimming vessels have recovered approximately 2,300 gallons of oil-water mixture since the incident occurred. The tank levels are being continually monitored. The leaking tank contained approximately 80,000 gallons of light crude oil. An estimated 7,000 gallons of oil is unaccounted for with an unknown quantity potentially contained in the void spaces of the damaged barge. The Mississippi River remains closed to all traffic for a 16-mile distance between mile marker 425 and mile marker 441 near Vicksburg. Currently there are 21 northbound and 34 southbound vessels affected due to the river closure. Mississippi River vessel traffic queue management is ongoing. Vessels will be allowed to transit the area as soon as it is environmentally and operationally safe to do so. Personnel from Coast Guard Sector Lower Mississippi River, Coast Guard Marine Safety Detachment Vicksburg and the Coast Guard Gulf Strike Team from Mobile, Ala., are on scene as part of a unified command effort to oversee cleanup and salvage operations. The unified command consists of representatives from the Coast Guard, State on-scene coordinators from Mississippi and Louisiana and the owner of the towing vessel, Nature's Way Marine LLC. The Coast Guard investigation into the incident is ongoing. ### [SEP] The following internet link should take you to a multimedia USCG Press Release. It may be necessary to paste the link into the address box of your browser. http://cgvi.uscg.mil/media/main.php?g2_itemId=1880069 [SEP] News Release UPDATE: Coast Guard continues response to crude oil spill near Vicksburg VICKSBURG, Miss. ???€? The unified command continues to respond to a crude oil spill in the lower Mississippi River near mile marker 436 in Vicksburg, Miss., Wednesday. At approximately 2:30 p.m. the tow-barge that is on scene started removing fuel from the damaged barge MOC-12. The damaged barge will be inspected and prepared for transit to a maritime facility nearby Vicksburg after oil removal operations are complete. ???€?Despite the response crew efforts to contain the seeping oil, an unspecified amount has broken through the containment boom due to the difficulties of working on a dynamic and powerful river current,???€? said Capt. William Drelling, Federal On Scene Commander for the Vicksburg oil spill. ???€?Skimmers are on scene to help minimize the environmental threat of any additional potential releases.???€? Response crews have deployed 2,800-feet of boom to contain further oil release. Skimming vessels have recovered approximately 3,900 gallons of oil-water mixture since the incident occurred. The tank levels are being continually monitored. The Mississippi River remains closed for a 16-mile distance between mile marker 425 and mile marker 441 near Vicksburg. However, the unified command is working with the Coast Guard???€?s Marine Transportation System Recovery Unit to coordinate the transit of vessels to test the effects on response operations. Currently, there are 34 northbound vessels with 532 barges and 37 southbound vessels with 524 barges affected due to the river closure. Mississippi River vessel traffic queue management is ongoing. The unified command consists of representatives from the Coast Guard, state on-scene coordinators from Mississippi and Louisiana and the owner of the towing vessel, Nature's Way Marine LLC. Personnel from Coast Guard Sector Lower Mississippi River, Coast Guard Marine Safety Detachment Vicksburg and the Coast Guard???€?s National Strike Force are on scene as part of a unified command effort to oversee cleanup and salvage operations. A safety zone is in effect between the mile markers. The Vicksburg Riverfront Boat Ramp is scheduled to re-open today, however boating within the safety zone is prohibited. The Coast Guard investigation into the incident is ongoing. For further information or media inquiries contact the Information Center in Vicksburg at (601) 801- 3521. ### Date: Jan 30, 2013 Unified Command Contact: Information Center Office: (601) 801-3521 Saving Lives and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future.
On 17JAN13, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a towing vessel which sank 200 ft off the right descending bank of the Mississippi River at mile marker 135, about 40 river miles west of New Orleans. The towing vessel is not currently releasing any oil or diesel, but concern is high. USCG is requesting a trajectory for a worse case discharge.
On January 15, 2013, USCG MSU Baton Rouge contacted the NOAA SSC in regards of a spill in Bayou Sorrel. The USCG was notified and responded on January 15th, even though the spill occurred on Janary 3, 2013. The spill is from a 4 inch pipeline (now secure) which released an estimated 100 bbl of crude oil. Due to the unusually arduous site conditions, authorization for in-situ burn has been requested. USCG has requested advice from NOAA. [SEP] http://www.wbrz.com/news/coast-guard-investigating-bayou-sorrel-oil-spill/ http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/1685423/Coast-Guard-oversees-controlled- burn-at-Frog-Lake-Bayou-Sorrel-facility Coast Guard oversees controlled burn at Frog Lake Bayou Sorrel facility BATON ROUGE, La. ???€? The Coast Guard, along with federal, state and local agencies, will monitor a controlled burn of an oil spill in the Bayou Sorrel area, Saturday. The burn is a part of the cleanup operations in response to a ruptured pipeline at the Frog Lake Bayou Sorrel Facility. On Jan. 9, Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Baton Rouge received notification of a ruptured pipeline at the Frog Lake Bayou Sorrel facility, owned by ORB Exploration. The ruptured pipeline began discharging oil spilling an estimated 5,000 gallons of oil product before the leak was secured. The Coast Guard and Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator???€?s Office are currently supervising cleanup operations while ensuring that all safety and environmental concerns are met and the best strategies are utilized. To date, approximately 1,750 gallons have already been contained and recovered successfully. In consideration of the isolated woodland marsh area, a controlled and purposeful burning of oil in the water will be conducted Saturday morning. The operations will be led and executed by American Pollution Control. This specific method will be used in order to effectively minimize the environmental impact. "Several organizations spanning from federal to local coming together seamlessly to carefully solve this complex problem, with challenging variables like the remote area and inclement weather, is a true testament of professionalism and dedication to all of the organizations involved,???€? said Cmdr. Quincy Davis, commanding officer of MSU Baton Rouge. ???€?We have proven that we are willing and able to do what needs to be done for the safety of our community and environment.???€? The in-situ burn will last up to 24 hours, and all community members are urged to remain at least a half a mile mile away from the affected area. For more information in regards to this operation, please contact Lt. Victoria Saxon at 225-281-0109. Public questions or concerns about smoke overexposure should be directed to the Poison Control Center at 1-800-222-1222.
The Royal Dutch Shell drilling rig Kulluk went aground on Sitkalidak Island, Alaska on January 1, 2013. Sitkalidak is an uninhabitated island just south of Kodiak Island. The Kulluk was being towed from Dutch Harbor to Seattle by the towing vessel Aiviq when it lost engine power, which caused the loss of the Kulluk. Although power was restored to the Aiviq, subsequent attempts at reattaching the tow were not successful, in part due to heavy weather. The Kulluk has on board approximately 144,000 gallons of diesel fuel and 16,000 gallons of lube oils and hydraulic fluid. Currently the Kulluk is sitting upright and there are no observable fuel leaks. The weather continues to remain rough, which is hampering attempts at salvage efforts and site visits.  By Jan. 6 the weather was calmer and salvage crews had stabilized the drilling rig.   As a result the Aiviq, connected by tow, was able to successfully refloat the Kulluk and began towing it to Kliuda Bay, 30 n.m. away.  During the early morning hours of Jan. 7 the Kulluk safely arrived in Kilida Bay and was anchored to its safe harbor assessment position where a thorough evaluation of its condition will be evaluated prior to continuing on to Seattle.
The SSC was notified by Sector NY of the grounding of the 800 foot M/T Stena Primorsk south of Albany, NY. At this time there is no oil being released. The ballast tank has been breached. No request for any additional actions from NOAA at this time.
On 17DEC12, MSU Morgan City contact NOAA for scientific support relating to a potential release of 1,000 gl of marine diesel from a MODU in distress. The vessel is located 14nm offshore, west of Marsh Island, in Vermillion Block 65. USCG is working salvage issues as well as marine pollution. USCG is seeking a trajectory and fate analysis if all diesel were released.
USCG Sector New York requested scientific support from NOAA Emergency Response Division on 31Oct2012 for Hurricane Sandy related pollution incidents.  The USCG is currently responding to oil spills in Arthur Kill, NJ/NY. NOAA personnel are on-scene at the USCG command post. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-08 12:33:35 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.63011386 Longitude: -74.22801174 Comment: Phillips 66 - Drum and disk skimmers in operation Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-12 09:47:31 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.62982265 Longitude: -74.21824551 Comment: The tanks that overflowed during the storm surge. Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-04 11:04:55 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.5199496 Longitude: -74.2416308 Comment: Mill Creek, Ny - stained vegetation Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-01 11:57:16 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.376636 Longitude: -74.029197 Comment: Navesink Imported from PhotoLogger. Photo credit: NOAA [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-07 11:15:10 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.62931732 Longitude: -74.23091039 Comment: Phillips 66 - oiled woodland area Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-04 10:40:34 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.53294775 Longitude: -74.2522812 Comment: Buckeye South side Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-07 10:36:44 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.62939056 Longitude: -74.23074707 Comment: Phillips 66 - heavy concentration of oil in drainage ditch. Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-08 15:46:02 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.55890038 Longitude: -74.24827465 Comment: Motiva - Northern most of Smith Creek Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-01 11:22:07 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.627209 Longitude: -74.203396 Comment: Phillips 66 Imported from PhotoLogger. Photo Credit: NOAA [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-02 11:18:24 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.641474 Longitude: -74.121864 Comment: Photo credit: NOAA; Sheen entering Kill Van Kull from boat yard. Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] A PDF that describes the expected behavior of diesel and biodiesel fuels. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-04 10:15:39 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.55365252 Longitude: -74.25589074 Comment: Smith Creek Imported from PhotoLogger.
At about 0830 Pacific time Coast Guard Sector Puget Sound contacted NOAA SSC about a vessel collision. Between approximately 0530 and 0600 a vessel collision occurred in position 47 55.5 N, 125 19.6 W between the F/V MAVERICK and F/V VIKING STORM. The 40 foot F/V MAVERICK subsequently sunk.  The F/V VIKING STORM is sound and is not a pollution threat. Visibility is limited due to fog. This location is 1.5 miles inside the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary. The sanctuary has been informed of the situation. Although the fuel potential is not confirmed, given the distance offshore that the collision occured, the current wind conditions, the forecasted wind conditions, and the reported size of the vessel it is not expected that any fuel would impact shore. NOAA is providing a weather forecast. [SEP] News Release: Coast Guard searches for missing crewmember west of La Push SEATTLE ???€? The Coast Guard is searching for a missing person approximately 30 miles west of La Push, Wash., Friday. The missing person was one of four crewmembers on board the 40-foot fishing vessel Maverick, which was involved in a collision with the 90-foot fishing vessel Viking Storm. The Maverick sank as a result of the collision and three of the four crewmembers were recovered by the crew of the Viking Storm. The Coast Guard has diverted and deployed multiple assets to the scene to search for the missing person including the Coast Guard Cutter Alert, a 210- foot Medium Endurance Cutter from Astoria, Ore., Cutter Chandeleur, a 110-foot patrol boat based in Ketchikan, Alaska, an MH-65C helicopter crew from Air Station Port Angeles, Wash., and a 47-foot motor lifeboat crew from Station Quillayute River. The three crewmembers rescued by the Viking Storm were transferred to the Alert. The crewmembers were reported to be in stable condition. For additional information contact the Coast Guard public affairs office at (206) 220-7237.
At approximately 1200 Pacfic time September 24, 2012 NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Sector Puget Sound of the sunk fishing vessel GEMINI (officially registered as WESTERN FLYER) under the Twin Bridges in the Swinomish channel in Washington. It is unknown why the vessel sunk. The vessel was leaking diesel, although it is unknown how much diesel leaked. The vast majority was recovered by dive operations. The maximum capacity of the vessel is 750 gallons of diesel and 100 gallons of hydraulic fuel. NOAA ERD provided trajectory, tides, currents, resources at risk, and weather information for the situation.
This is a sub-incident hotline started 7Sep12 of the General Hurr Isaac General support that is for activities within the Sector Mobile AOR.
On 28Aug12, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the NOAA SSC for a trajectory for a drifting floating dry dock, 650'long x 137'wide.  Dry dock is owned by Southern Recycling, who was towing it to a "breaking yard" when the tow cable parted. Draft of the dry dock is reported as 7', and height of the wing walls is estimated as 35' (based on discussion with a Tampa dry dock company).Below are the last known positions and drift speed and direction from 27 AUG. 1430 pos'n: 27-57.478  089-43.403W, Course 220T, 3kts (radar) 1630 pos'n: 27-41N  089-56W, Course 220T, 4kts (radar) 2030 pos'n: 27-34N  090-08W, Course 220T, 4kts (DR) 2230 pos'n: 27-30N  090-13W, Wind NNE 35-40kts (DR)
A 474 foot container ship is aground on the coast of Cuba off Mariel.  The vessel has RNH 380 (174,426 gal) and diesel (27,500 gal) aboard. Weather and seas caused by tropical storm Issac has prevented response so far.  USCG is expecting the ship to lose the fuel and has requested a trajectory from NOAA.
On August 27, 2012 at 0910 (eastern), USCG contacted the SSC to report the release of 1000 barrels of JP-5 jet fuel from a leaking or broken pipeline that had occurred earlier that morning at 0631 (eastern).  At the time of SSC contact, an accurate lat/long was not available but was reported to be near the intersection of Illinois Highway 83 and South 86th Ave in Palos Heights, IL.  JP-5 has reportedly reached a nearby creek and threatens the Cal-Sag Channel.  Although USEPA is the lead agency, the USCG FOSCr has requested information on fate and toxicity.  SSC contacted the OOD and has provided phone support.  USCG and/or USEPA may request additional support as this spill progresses.NRC Incident Report #'s 1022270 and 1022271
At 2215EDT USCG Marine Safety Unit Morgan City, LA contacted the NOAA SSC requesting a trajectory for a crude oil pipeline leak.  Maximum potential volume in the 10" by 1.3mi pipeline is 667BBL.  However, the product in the pipeline is 80% produced water and 20% crude oil (API=30), so the estimated total potential oil spill is approx. 133BBL (5600gal).Leak location is approximately 16mi ESE of Grand Isle, LA, and 9mi SW of Pelican Isl, in Lease Block West Delta 31. The leak was creating a sheen of 1.75mi x 1.75mi when observed during an overflight at 1830CDT, with a coverage of 70% of variously: Metallic, Transitional, and Silver color.
At 1045hrs (local time), CA’s Office of Spill Prevention & Response (OSPR) contacted their NOAA SSC to request a trajectory estimate for the F/V SEA BISCUIT, which beached late last night in the surf near Bodega Bay, CA.  The vessel has 150 gallons of diesel on board and a rainbow sheen was observed nearby sometime this morning.  The State is considering a temporary closure of some local fisheries in the vicinity as a result of the spill and have requested a trajectory estimate on which to base their closure boundary.
At 1000hrs (local time), USCG District 11 Command Center contacted their NOAA SSC about a potential release from Platform IRENE off Point Arguello, just to the North & West of Santa Barbara Channel.  A pressure drop was detected on one of Platform IRENE’s production lines with a reported maximum potential volume of 31,000 gallons crude.  No product has been observed on the surface by platform workers on-scene.  An Oil Spill Response Vessel (OSRV) is on-scene and transiting the pipeline corridor connecting Platform IRENE to shore to look for product on the surface.  In addition, a helicopter overflight is being scheduled with the local Sheriff’s office and a USCG C-130 overflight may occur later in the day.  A precautionary “what-if” trajectory has been requested.
In the early afternoon of 23-August-2012, USCG Sector Los Angeles/Long Beach contacted their NOAA SSC to request support for a mystery sheen reported earlier in the day.  A sheen from an unknown source was observed and reported to the USCG at approximately 0700 hours (local) at 33º 30.09’N, 118º 07.08’W.  A subsequent USCG overflight at approximately 1030 hours (local) observed a heavy sheen covering approximately 1 square mile.  A trajectory estimate was requested.
At 1030EDT 22Aug12, the NOAA SSC (NOLA) was contacted by USCG MSU Morgan City for trajectory support for a small (10gal/hr) submerged well/pipeline leak of S. LA Crude (API=36.2).  Location of the leak is just off the SW Pass of the Mississippi R. delta.  Leak is creating a "bright" (25%) to silvery (75%) sheen 1mi x 3/4mi in size. Source is at or just below the mudline in 250' of water at a production well leading to a pipeline.  The responsible party, Walter Oil and Gas Co.,is in the process of securing the leak. Environmental conditions reported on site are current 0.5kt constant to the west, air temp=80F, winds 5-7kt from NW.
A 43 foot recreational fishing vessel grounded on the 'Sow and Pigs Reef" just south of Cuttyhunk Island in Buzzards Bay, MA.  She is carrying 400 gallons of diesel fuel and was towed to an intentional grounding area on a sand/gravel beach on the north side of Westend Pond (which does not communicate with the sea).  Actions:1. She currently sits 200 yds off the beach, vents have been closed and she is no longer sheening.2. Salvage resources are due to arrive by 2000 tonight3. NOAA SSC has informed and briefed the DOI Trustee, particularly with regard to Penikese Island (2.5 miles to the north) where roseate terns (endangered) have been known to roost.  Potential for impacts is very low.4. NOAA produced fate models indicating very low likelihood of oil threatening Penikese Island.
On August 2, 2012, a fire at transformer recycling company in Columbia County, NY, resulted in a release of an unknown amount of chemicals, including PCB-laden oil and combustion by-products.  A 15 mile radius shelter in place warning was issued by the county. NOAA ERD was contacted regarding air plume modeling and chemical sampling priorities.
Early on the morning of July 29, NOAA received a report from Coast Guard MSD Ketchikan that the FV View Point had grounded and taken on water and sank in 200 fathoms of water in Gardner Bay, part of South Prince of Wales Bay, with 400 gallons of diesel on board. One POB had evacuated the vessel and was saved by a Good Sam.  Due to the dramatic similarities to the FV Mary Kay sinking just two days ago, the trajectory and fate analysis were essentially identical. CG and ADFG will be overflying the site later today to evaluate the size and scope of the problem due to a commercial fishing opening on Monday. [SEP] AGF&G conducted an over flight of both areas(Gardner Bay for FV ViewPoint and Cape Chacon for FV Mary Kay) yesterday at approximately 0830, there was fog and light rain with roughly 1 ft. seas. No signs of sheen were observed outside Gardner bay, and no sheen was observed in the Cape Chacon area. There was no effect on the fishery.
USCG Sector Guam notified the NOAA SSC on July 29 that an 18-foot US National Park Service work boat had capsized and was aground on reef at Asa Beach in Adelup, Guam. The vessel was carrying 25 gallons of fuel at the time but no discharge was observed. At the time of notification, plans were being made to remove the vessel.  This was a NOAA notification.  No ERD support was requested.
On Saturday, 28Jul12, USCG Morgan City contacted the SSC to request fate of a silvery sheen 2mix1mi in Lease Block Vermillion 51, approximately 13mi south of the LA coastline. Sheen was sighted from an oil platform adn reported as tending toward the SE. Source of the sheen was unknown, nor was the type of oil.  The SSC indicated that the sheen would not impact the coastline unless the source of the sheen increased significantly. SSC suggested that CG contact the SSC again if the situation changed and more information became available.
MSU Morgan City contacted the NOAA SSC regarding the fate and trajectory for a leak in a 14" crude oil pipeline in the Gulf of Mexico 64 mi SE of Timbalier Bay. The leak is currently minor and only creating a 4mi x 150'wide rainbow slick trending to the NE. At the current rate of leak the slick should not grow larger or longer and is no threat to land. Once additional information is received from the RP regarding if the leak has been stopped, if the pipeline has been shut in, the maximum volume potential (within the shut in section), and exact nature of the product, NOAA will run a trajectory model in the event of a catastrophic release.
On 12JUL12, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC for support of a mystery sheen reported by a Good Samaritan helicopter at 1410 CDT. The sheen was reported as 15 miles by 0.5 miles and rainbow in color. The reported position is 11 nautical miles east of Redfish Bay and Northeast Pass, east of the Mississippi Delta. It is not known where the reported position is in relation to the entire sheen. The report also claims the sheen to be traveling southwest. An overflight scheduled to investigate the sheen this afternoon was diverted for SAR. USCG is requesting a trajectory for directing an overflight scheduled for tomorrow morning.
45 foot aluminium hull vessel grounded on Squibnocket Beach (SE facing side) overnight.  The vessel is carrying 800 gallons of diesel fuel (no release).  The owner attempted to haul the vessel off the beach prior to high tide, resulting in a breach of the hull.  Coast Guard is on scene along with a professional salvage company with hopes of refloating the vessel on the high tide.  If that is not possible, a more complex salvage plan will be required.Access is difficult and the area is important to two endangered species, the piping plover (currently with chicks) and the northeastern beach tiger beetle.  This is critical habitat for the beetle in particular.USFWS and MA Div. of Fisheries and Wildlife experts have been engaged.
On June 21, 2012, NOAA was notified of the grounding of the M/V Jireh on the west shore of Mona Island, Puerto Rico.  The 200-foot vessel was reported aground this morning at 0700 local time.  The vessel is hard aground on coral, rock and sand bottom. Position is reported as Lat/Lon: 18 04.07N, 067 55.5W.  The USCG has requested SSC support in the response/salvage/removal effort and NRDA teams are preparing to address coral injury. [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/1482251/UPDATE-Coast-Guard-state-and-local-agencies-monitor-response-removal-operations-underway-in-Mona-Island-Puerto-Rico [SEP] USCG PRESS RELEASE PLAN [SEP] Photo of the Jireh aground. Photo Credit: USCG [SEP] Unified Command continues efforts for freighter grounding in Mona Island, Puerto Rico Posted: 23 Jun 2012 06:09 PM PDT SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico ???€? The Coast Guard and other federal, state and industry responders continue efforts and are evaluating potential salvage options for the 185-foot cargo freighter that ran aground just off Uvero Beach in Mona Island, Puerto Rico Thursday. ???€?Our primary concern right now is the recovery of the fuel and oil onboard the freighter and minimizing environmental impact,???€? said Cmdr. David Berliner, Coast Guard Incident Commander to the response. As a preventive measure, response crews deployed approximately 800-feet of containment boom around the cargo freighter in order to minimize environmental impact. The Coast Guard Cutter Reef Shark is maintaining a 500-yard safety zone around the vessel. Atlantis Divers completed a thorough underwater hull assessment and found no significant damage to the ship???€?s hull or signs of pollution in the water Saturday. ???€?Puerto Rico Environmental Quality Board has been working jointly with state agencies and with the Coast Guard to protect the environment and prevent any significant impact to natural resources,???€? said Eng. Amarilys Rosario, State Incident Commander to the response. Oil spill removal contractors are staging equipment to remove the more than 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel aboard the vessel as early as Sunday. An Incident Command Post and Unified Command comprised of federal, state and industry agencies and organizations has been established at Coast Guard Base San Juan to manage response and salvage efforts of the coastal freighter Jireh. The Incident Command Post includes the Coast Guard, Puerto Rico Environmental Quality Board, U.S. Fish and Wildlife, the National Atmospheric & Oceanic Administration, Puerto Department of Natural and Environmental Resources, and Clean Harbors as the contracted Oil Spill Response Organization. The Coast Guard continues investigating the cause of the grounding. Copyright ?? 2007-2011 Coast Guard News This feed is for personal, non-commercial use only. http://coastguardnews.com/unified-command-continues-efforts-for-freighter-grounding-in-mona-island-puerto-rico/2012/06/23/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+CoastGuardNews+%28Coast+Guard+News%29 [SEP] http://d7.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/1518403/Response-crews-begin-cutting-up-grounded-vessel-for-removal-from-Mona-Island
At 0600 ADT on June 9, Sector Anchorage notified the Alaskan SSC that the 175', 495 gross tons, M/V Monterrey landing craft had grounded adjacent to Puffin Island located in Chiniak Bay, Kodiak, Alaska, at 0100, June 9. After striking an object, the vessel intentionally grounded rupturing the forward, starboard fuel tank which contained 1000 to 8000 gallons of diesel.  The vessel was immediately boomed off with harbor boom and Alaska CHADEX was hired to deal with the spill. The vessel is on lease to the Army Corp of Engineers from the Navy. Coast Guard personnel from MSD Kodiak are on scene.  A trajectory and weather forecast were requested from NOAA. [SEP] Weather Forecast for Chiniak Bay, as of Monday morning, June 11, from NWS Anchorage: Monday: NW winds, 20 kts, 4 ft. seas, rain showers Tonight: W Winds, 15 kts, Seas, 3 ft., Chance of rain Tuesday: Winds variable, 10 kts, Seas, 2 ft, scattered showers in afternoon John Whitney NOAA SSC for Alaska [SEP] Alaska Public Radio / KMXT Radio (100.1 FM, Kodiak, AK) Monday, June 11, 2012 15,000 Gallons of Fuel Leak from Army Reserve Vessel By Jay Barrett KMXT - Kodiak Oil spill specialists from the U.S. Coast Guard, Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation, U.S. Army and Alaska Chadux Corporation worked all weekend to contain and clean up an estimated 15,000 gallons of diesel fuel that spilled from a U.S. Army Reserve landing craft that hit Humpback Rock just offshore of Kodiak City late Friday night. Three Monterrey crewmen suffered slight injuries in the incident. The fishing vessel Peggy Joe transported them ashore for medical attention. At the direction of the Coast Guard, the 174-foot Monterrey was intentionally grounded after it started taking on water, according to Army Reserve spokeswoman Major Annmarie Daneker. Two containment booms were put around the Monterrey Saturday morning, but enough fuel had already escaped that a diesel fuel sheen could be seen and smelled along the Kodiak waterfront. More containment boom was placed at the mouth of the Buskin River to protect salmon habitat. The Monterrey was transporting heavy construction equipment from Port Hueneme, California, to Newtok on the coast between the Yukon and Kuskokwim rivers, in support of a U.S. Marine Corps mission called Mertervik Innovative Readiness Training. That is a five- year project to relocate Newtok because of erosion and melting permafrost. Daneker said she did not have a timeline for salvage of the Monterrey or if the heavy equipment would be transferred to another vessel to complete its trip to Western Alaska. URL: http://www.alaskapublic.org/2012/06/11/15000-gallons-of-fuel-leak-from-army-reserve-vessel/ [SEP] KODIAK, Alaska - Responders continue to work to contain and clean up diesel fuel from the grounded 174-foot landing craft Monterrey in Chiniak Bay near Kodiak June 12, 2012. The vessel sustained hull damage and began taking on water prompting the crew to intentionally beach the vessel on Puffin Island to prevent it from sinking June 9. U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 1st Class Stephen Prevatt. [SEP] Tues: SW winds 15 kts, Seas 3 ft; Scattered showers Wed: Variable winds, 10 kt, Seas 2 ft., Scattered showers Wed. night: After midnight, NE winds 15 kts., Scattered showers Thurs Morning: NE winds 15 kts, Seas 3-4 ft, rain diminishing [SEP] The approximate location of the M/V Monterrey grounding site is indicated by the red "X" on the attached chartlet (from NOAA Chart No. 16594). Note that the depicted location is based on recent USCG photos posted in Hotline rather than the Latitude/Longitude provided earlier. This location is between Downtown Kodiak, AK and USCG AIRSTA Kodiak. [SEP] KODIAK, Alaska - Response workers from Alaska Chadux and Coast Guard Marine Safety Detachment Kodiak work to assess damage to the Army vessel Monterrey grounded on Puffin Island in Chiniak Bay near Kodiak June 9, 2012. The crew of the Monterrey grounded the vessel after it reportedly struck a submerged rock, which led to significant hull damage. U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Jonathan Klingenberg. [SEP] For some unknown reason CG Sector Anchorage was unable to transmit an evening situation report. From other sources I have learned that today, Monday, the CG said that two areas were identified for cleanup after a shoreline assessment and that absorbent pads will be used to clean as much fuel as possible from these areas. Also, additional containment booms have been established around the Monterrey and the CG says absorbent material on booms is being replaced regularly. Additional information can be found in the attached ADEC Polrep 2 John Whitney Alaska SSC
On 07JUN12, USCG MSU Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC about a 8 inch natural gas pipeline that has been breached and is leaking condensate and gas. The reported position is about 6 miles offshore and in shallow waters. A 2 1/2 mile section of pipeline has been shut in and the pressure in the line is dropping. USCG is requesting a trajectory from NOAA to determine potential shoreline impacts.
At 0330 PST The NOAA SSC was contacted about a potential spill off of the Oregon Coast, 1.5 miles offshore of Umqua River Bar entrance. The 32' wooden hull FV ARIES went down, but did not release any pollutants. The vessel has a reported 400 gallons of diesel on-board. All aboard were safety evacuated. Weather and hypothetical release trajectory were requested. [SEP] F/V ARIES has been safely towed into Winchester Bay, OR. No report of pollution release. [SEP] LT Rossetti, The forecast for today and tomorrow as follows: TODAY: This morning, N wind 5 to 10 kt increasing to 15 kt in the afternoon with gusts to 20 kt . TONIGHT: N winds 5 kt. Seas 5 ft. TOMORROW: N winds less than 5 kt in the morning increasing to 5 to 10 kt in the afternoon. Seas 4 ft. For both today and tomorrow, visibility is expected to be good below the 20,000 ft cloud deck. Discussion of worst case scenario discharge: Given the forecasted seas and winds for near-offshore Umpqua river entrance, if the vessel were to discharge all 400 gallons it is expected no noticeable shoreline impacts. During light winds, a sheen would be expected. During stronger winds, a sheen may still occur, but would dissipate quickly. The sheen size will depend on wind speed - the higher the wind speed the quicker the sheen will dissipate, resulting in a smaller sheen. Please contact me with any further questions, or if the scenario changes. V/R, LTJG Drury, NOAA [SEP] SSC was informed that the owner has arranged salvage of vessel, though no time frame as of yet. There have not been any reports of discharge.
On 23MAY2012, USCG MSU Morgan City contacted the NOAA SSC about a mystery sheen discovered by BSEE during an unrelated flight. The sheen is approximately 65 miles offshore, due south of Marsh Island. There is no known source and product chemistry is unknown. Platforms in the area were contacted and none report any release. USCG is requesting a trajectory, fate of sheen and hindcast.
At 1530CDT USCG MSU Morgan City contacted the New Orleans SSC to request NOAA support in locating the likely source of a light sheen observed from a platform in lease block West Delta 117.  Sheen was described as barely visible and 15% coverage, about 2 miles wide by at least 7 miles long (from the platform) but a helo pilot from the rig indicated it extended all the way to the shoreline near Venice, LA.  NOAA ERD is providing oceanographer-modeling support to the CG.
A 750 foot Venezuelan tanker, the Yare, grounded 88 nm south of Andros Island, Bahamas on 10 May 2012 at approximately 1500 EST.  The vessel is reported to be carrying a cargo of 245,000 barrels of crude oil plus an unknown quantity of ship's diesel fuel.  The vessel is reported to be aground the entire length of the hull.  No spill has been reported.  USCG is monitoring and conducting an overflight of the area this morning (5/11/12).  NOAA SSC has been asked to provide a trajectory, weather FT and oil fate info.
NOAA SSC was contacted 1230 PST May 9 by Olympic National Sanctuary about a Makah Fishing Vessel aground just west of Neah Bay in the sanctuary. No pollutants have been released, and all persons that were on board have been evacuated safely. Requested was tides, currents, and localized weather forecast for salvage planning purposes. USCG D13 also contacted SSC requesting possible pollution impacts if any diesel were released. Potential for 50-100 gallon diesel release.
SSC was notified by USCG Sector Columbia River of a mystery sheen in the Willamette River, extending from Oregon City Falls north to Milwaukie in Oregon (just south of Portland). There is not a known source, amount, or type of oil. Sheen is being reported as "grey and weathered". Sector Columbia River is looking for a trajectory of where the oil may go and guidance on what should be protected.
On the evening of 09-May-2012, USCG Sector LA/Long Beach contacted their NOAA SSC regarding a cracked overflow pipe on Platform Elly (approx. 7.5NM off Huntingon Beach, CA) that was discharging a small amount of visible sheen.  Release rate is reported as approximately 2-3 gallons per day and patching of the pipe is scheduled to commence early tomorrow morning.  In the meantime, a precautionary (“what if”) trajectory estimate has been requested in the event the patching operations encounter difficulties.
At 2000 CST on 07MAY12, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC about a pipeline release of LA sweet crude oil that occurred at 0800 the same day. The situation has stabilized and the pipeline is secure. USCG has been on scene and an OSRO has been hired by the RP. Overflight occurred at 1430 CST today and spotted a 10mi sheen moving NW along the coast. USCG has request a trajectory for sheen position at daylight tomorrow.
At around 1000CDT the NOAA SSC was contacted regarding a collision in the Port Aransas TX shipping channel between a 750' tanker vessel (TV FR8 Pride) and a jack-up rig Rowan XL-1 at 0700CDT on 2May2012.  The only discharge at this time is an unknown but small amount of hydraulic fluid creating a small sheen.  USCG has indicated that they do not expect a larger release, and no discharge is reported from the tanker.NOAA SSC is coordinating with Sector Corpus Christi, but no direct science support from NOAA has been requested at this time.
The USCG Morgan City contacted the NOAA SSC this evening about a sheen  in Timbalier Block 23. The sheen was reported to be a 2 mi X 100 ft silvery sheen heading NW. The location was about 6 miles from shore, to the southwest of Timbalier Bay. A trajectory analysis was requested.
At 2047 hours (Pacific) USCG Sector San Francisco contacted the NOAA SSC to request a drift estimate for the inbound M/V Pacific Sea, a 623 foot bulk cargo carrier that had lost propulsion and adrift approximately 17nm Southwest of Point Arena, CA.  Attempts are presently underway to get her under tow.  She is accompanied by a tow vessel and the USCG Cutter Sockeye.  Sector San Francisco requested a drift estimate.
On 18APR12, USCG Houma contacted NOAA SSC about a mystery sheen in Timbalier Bay reported by a good Samaritan helicopter. The sheen is reported to be 5mi by 3mi rainbow sheen with a 50yrd by 100yrd black area on the leading edge. The quantity, product and source are unknown. USCG is seeking a trajectory.
At 1224 CST on 17MAR, USCG Sector New Orleans contact NOAA SSC about a thick black sheen (1 mi by 1 mi) discovered by USCG personnel working in the vicinity. A jack-up rig dropped their spuds onto a pipeline earlier this morning causing an uncontrolled release of crude oil. The release has been for at least 3 hours and continues unsecured. Trajectory analysis has been requested.
At 1340 CST on 14MAR, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the NOAA SSC about support for a sheen resulting from an break in a pipeline. USCG did not know what product was released, size/orientation of the sheen or amount released. An overflight is scheduled for later this afternoon. USCG is seeking a trajectory to guide the overflight.
NOAA SSC notified 2100 PST of a Fishing Vessel aground on northern tip of jetty for entrance to Yaquina Bay, Oregon. Vessel is leaking diesel, at most 3000-4000 gallons. USCG requested trajectory support from NOAA ERD.
At 1030am CST on 29Feb2012, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the D-8 SSC to request science support (trajectory forecast, satellite imagery) for a crude oil (condensate) release in Garden Island Bay, Plaquemins Parish, LA starting at 1900CST, 27Feb2012.  The discharge is estimated as 700gallons and has been secured and isolation booming is complete.  NOAA support is requested in support of shoreline assessment (SCAT).
On 27FEB at 1530 CST, MSU Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC for trajectory support for a mystery sheen. At 1430 CST, USCG received a report of a mystery sheen with dimensions of 5mi by 1/4mi located at 29-24-30N 091-59-32W, South Marsh Island Block 223. The orientation of the sheen and location of lat/long relative to the sheen was not given.
On 19FEB12 USCG Texas City contact NOAA SSC about a calcium chloride release of 2,025 bbl at ~3600 ft below the sea surface. The chemical is not a regulated substance and is of little environmental impact. The concern from USCG was related to the proximity to National Marine Sanctuary Flower Gardens (~50nm away). After consulting previous Responselink Hotlines and a chemist, NOAA SSC confirmed USCG suspicions that this release would not likely impact the Flower Gardens and that there is little environmental impact anticipated. Calcium Chloride is an inorganic salt that will slowly distribute along the seabed and slowly dissolve into seawater with no long term toxicity. The NRC reported is posted and this hotline will be closed out.
On 17FEB12 at 0330 CST USCG Sector New Orleans IMD contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a release associated with tug and barge colliding with another tug and barge. This incident occurred at approx 0130 CST at Mississippi River mile marker 140 in St John the Baptist Parish (New Orleans is 27 miles away as the crow flies and at river mile marker 105). There is estimated to be 270 bbl of crude oil (chemistry unknown) in the water and trajectory is requested. [SEP] View this data in ERMA. [SEP] News Release Date: February 17, 2012 Contact: External Affairs Duty Public Affairs Specialist (504) 671-2020 Coast Guard responds to report of crude oil in Mississippi River NEW ORLEANS ???€? A unified command has been established in response to a report of crude oil in the lower Mississippi River, near mile marker 139, approximately 50 miles upriver of New Orleans, Friday. Watchstanders at Coast Guard Sector New Orleans received notification at 1:58 a.m., reporting that a construction barge, towed by the tug Alydar, and a tank barge, towed by the motor vessel Clarence W. Settoon, collided. The tank barge was loaded with Louisiana sweet crude oil and suffered a 10-foot by 5-foot gash above the waterline, resulting in a release of oil into the lower Mississippi River. The impacted cargo tank reportedly was holding 3,535 barrels, or approximately 148,470 gallons, of crude oil. The actual amount of product released into the lower Mississippi River has not yet been determined, but is estimated to be substantially less than the total of the tank's contents. Coast Guard Sector New Orleans dispatched a pollution investigation team to assess the size of the spill. The source has been secured and soundings will be conducted to determine the actual amount of product released during the incident. The Coast Guard Captain of the Port New Orleans, Capt. Pete Gautier, has closed a section of the lower Mississippi River to all traffic from mile marker 135 to mile marker 140 near LaPlace. The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund has been opened and ES&H has been contracted as the oil spill response organization. "We are aggressively responding to this incident and have deployed pollution investigators from Sector New Orleans and an MH-65 Dolphin helicopter and crew from Coast Guard Air Station New Orleans to assess the situation," said Gautier. "We are working quickly and efficiently with our local and state partners to clean up product in the water and protect the maritime ecosystem and natural resources that are important to our national economy and essential to the livlihood and way of life for coastal communities." No injuries were reported. The unified command consists of representatives from the U.S. Coast Guard, Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office and Settoon Towing. The Coast Guard is investigating the cause of the incident.
On 15FEB12 USCG Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a mystery sheen reported at 0745 CST. The sheen is reported as 9mi long and 100 ft wide. It is unknown where in the sheen is in relation to the provided lat/long. There was no initial information related to sheen orientation, product released, source  or follow-up information beyond NRC report. During subsequent conversations, the source was determined to be a natural gas pipeline and sheen is produced from condensate. USCG is seeking trajectory to determine shoreline impacts.
On 02FEB12, USCG contacted NOAA SSC about a ruptured natural gas pipeline 7nm south of Timbalier Island in South Timbalier Block 37 (28-56-23N 090-21-21W, NRC#1001902). An associated sheen was reported as 4mi by 15 ft (NRC report stated 1 mile). The flowrate is unknown. The depth is about 50 feet. USCG is requesting trajectory and shoreline impact analysis.
This is only a potential spill.  In the middle of the night of Jan. 25, 2012, the FV Kimberly was forced aground by weather with winds gusting to over 100 knots on the West side of Shelikof Strait in Jute Bay.  The vessel owner reports that there are approximately 1900 gal. of diesel, 400 gal. of hydraulic oil, 70 gal. of lubricating oil, and 25 gallons of antifreeze on board.  The owner of the vessel reports that it was not taking on water when they abandoned the vessel even though the vessel had been blown a considerable distance up the primarily sandy beach.   The USCG rescued the 4 crew members from the grounding.  The RP is working with Magone Marine Services to develop a plan for removal of the fluids and any other hazardous substances from the vessel once weather permits.  The RP will then evaluate options and develop a plan for removal of the vessel from State tidelands [SEP] Photo credit to crew member Rolf Aarseth.
On 27JAN12 at 17:30, USCG Sector Corpus Christi contacted NOAA SSC about a report that came in at 16:00 of a 55 gl barrel floating in the Gulf of Mexico. The barrel has approx 1 inch exposed above the water's surface. The barrel has no markings and unknown contents. USCG is requesting a trajectory model.
On 24JAN12 at 0730, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC for support with a mystery sheen. It was reported to Sector New Orleans Command Center by an anonymous caller that a several mile long sheen was observed near Point A La Hache, Plaquemines Parish at 1555 on 23JAN12. IMD was also notified via NRC report 1001087. The sheen was described as several miles long of an unknown color from an unknown source. IMD requested satellite imagery from NOAA of the area reported during the time of the incident.
On Friday, 20 Jan, at 13:30 USCG MSU Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC in regards to a mystery sheen reported south of Grand Isle, LA. Sheen is reported being 4.5 miles offshore in Grand Isle Block 37 and approximately 6 mi by 1 mi in size, traveling in a north-east direction along the shore.  Chemistry of sheen is not known and source of sheen is not known.  USCG request trajectory report to determine shoreline impact.
USCG MSU Morgan City, LA contacted the NOAA SSC about a sheen from a well located at 29 deg 19.15 min N 091 deg 54.94 min W that produced a silvery sheen of 4 miles by 20 feet in the South Marsh Island Block 239. The wellhead is secure and not releasing any more oil. The sheen is presumed to be moving with the wind in a northerly direction. Quantity not known. USCG is looking for a trajectory to determine if shoreline impacts can be expected.
EPA made a courtesy notification to NOAA ERD on Friday, Dec 30 at 1440 to report a mystery spill on the Clearwater River in Orofino, ID.  At this time, there is just a drip from the sand.  The source, amount spilled, and type of fuel/oil is unknown.  The spill is contained with boom, and EPA is working with the state to identify the source.  No action is required of NOAA ERD.
On October 5, 2011, the Container Ship M/V Rena ran aground on Astrolabe Reef off the coast of Tauranga in New Zealand. The ship was carrying 1,368 containers, eight of which contained hazardous materials, as well as 1,700 tonnes of heavy fuel oil and 200 tonnes of marine diesel oil. This hotline was opened to capture documents related to the incident.
On the morning of 27SEP2011, the F/V Phyllis ran aground on the south shore of Santa Cruz Island, CA, within the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary and the Channel Islands National Park boundaries.  The vessel is believed to be carrying approximately 300 gallons of diesel fuel on board;  though no release has been observed at this time.  USCG Sector LA/LB contacted their NOAA SSC and requested trajectory support.
An unmanned US-flagged barge carrying 140,000 gallons of aviation fuel broke free from the US-flagged Towing Vessel SINUK in the Bering Straits near the Diomede Islands.  The tug has been unable to reacquire the barge due to weather conditions (46 mph winds, 10-15 foot seas). The Towing Vessel SINUK is shadowing the barge and providing hourly updates on position, weather, and intentions.  The US-flagged Towing Vessel SIKU is enroute to nearby Wales, AK to provide additional support if needed. NOAA ERD is standing by to provide scientific support include vessel drift information.  The freely drifting barge was successfully guided south through the Bering Straits where the SIKU was able to corral the barge and successfully tow it to Port Clarence for repairs and services.  Case closed.
At 1030 CDT, Sept 15, 2011 there was a report of a 1 mile by 1/2 mile slick at the north end of Barataria Bay.  The CG asked if we could help locate the source. [SEP] The following method was used to generate an estimate for the amount spilled: Barataria Mystery Slick was reported as a 1 mi. x 0.5 mi. rainbow sheen with no known source and no recoverable product. I don't have a volume but the sheen calculation with 100% Coverage and 100% Rainbow calculates approx. 100 gallons. However, that's ASSUMING a worst case of a 100% Coverage and 100% Rainbow-colored sheen.
The Coast Guard is responding to a report of crude oil discharge in Bayou Dupont and north Barataria Bay. Coast Guard Sector New Orleans received a report at 2:05 pm on Sept. 11, 2011 from a Plaquemine's Parish operator, that a pipeline from a platform was leaking crude oil into Bayou Dupont and north Barataria Bay. A second leak was located in a 2 inch flow line attached to a wellhead associated with this platform.  Coast Guard Sector New Orleans is coordinating response efforts with Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office (LOSCO), Louisiana State Police, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LADEQ), Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries (LAWLF), and Louisiana Department of Natural Resources (LDNR). Two responders from the Coast Guard Gulf Strike Team are also on scene providing technical assistance. The USCG has requested assistance from NOAA to provide oil trajectory support and on-scene environmental assessment.
On the morning of Aug 31st, a construction vehicle struck a high pressure oil transfer line at the Capital Terminal in East Providence, RI while a barge was off-loading and created a geyser of oil that first sprayed approximately a 1 acre area and then, once the valves were closed (5-6 minutes), leaked onto the ground.  The estimated aerial release was approximately 40-50 thousand gallons of diesel fuel and the remaining flow is yet to be determined, but could bring the total to over 100K.  Virtually the entire release is confined to the land, either in the spray area or in a quickly constructed dike area.  Only minor sheens have been reported in the Seekonk River.  Gross oil recovery is nearly complete and gauging is in progress to determine the amount released.  Assessments are in progress o determine the amount of oil remaining in the soil on top of the water table.  NOAA is assisting in estimating the evaporation amounts and ultimately the mass balance so that the amount remaining in the nearby soil can be approximated.
This hotline is being opened to capture information related to Hurricane Irene.  The Storm is currently a category 2 but is expecting to intensify
A 15 mile by 1 mile slick of oil was reported from a platform approximately 17 miles offshore from Port Arthur, TX at 0900 (local) Aug 23 2011.  USCG is conducting an overflight to investigate and will obtain a sample.
The NOAA SSC for CG District 8 was contacted at 1300EDT on 20Aug11 to request assistance in identifying potential sources for a sheen of unknown description 1 mi. long by 50ft wide that has persisted in lease block Mississippi Canyon 252 since Friday, 19Aug11 in the same approximate location.The NOAA SSC spoke BOEMRE regarding potential sources for such a sheen (of unknown color/description) at that location.  BOEMRE indicated that there is a known natural seep within 6 mi of the Macondo well.  The seep is a prime suspect for such a small sheen, but of course it could also be a small leak from the Macondo well also, or any other structure in that area.  Further, any leak from a sea floor source in that depth could surface miles away depending on any currents within the entire water column.
The NOAA SSC was notified this morning at 0500 by the HDO of an incident in Delaware Bay. On the morning of August 6, 2011, the T/V Sea Falcon, an  824 foot long doubble hull vessel carrying 524,000 bbls of crude oil ran aground in Big Stone Anchorage in Delaware Bay, offshore of Cape May, NJ.  No pollution has been reported. Cause Unknown. SSC has been coordinating with USCG Sector Delaware Bay. USCG requested trajectory, weather, and RAR. [SEP] The USCG personnel onboard the SEAFALCON report the vessel is refloated at approximately 1330 hours today and is en route anchorage at Big Stone Anchorage for repairs. No present discharge. [SEP] NWS SPOT FORECAST FOR BIG STONE ANCHORAGE 0530 EDT, Aug 6, 2011 Obsevations from Station BRND1 at Brandywine Shoal Light Winds have been from the S to SSW at 6 - 9 knots since 0200. Wind Forecast: Saturday: Winds expected to be from the S at 5 - 10 knots increasing to 10 - 15 knots Saturday Night: Winds forecast to be from the S at 15 knots Sunday: Winds expected to be from the SW at 10 - 15 knots Sunday Night: Winds forecast to be from the W at 5 - 10 knots Monday: Wind expected to be from the W at 10 knots Monday Night: Winds expected to be from the SE at 10 knots becoming NW after midnight Sea State: Saturday: 2 -3 ft seas Saturday night: 2 -3 ft seas Sunday: 2 - 3 ft seas Sunday night: 1 - 2 ft seas Monday: 1 - 2 ft seas Monday night: 1 - 2 ft seas Precipitation: Saturday and Saturday night: Chance of showers and afternoon thundershowers Sunday and Sunday night: Likely showers and thunderstorms in the morning and evening Monday and Monday night: Chance of showers and thundershowers Outlook: No severe weather expected for the forecast peridiod which extends thru Wednesday, Aug 10. [SEP] Tide
During mid-morning of 29 June 2011, USCG Sector San Diego contacted the NOAA Hazmat Duty Officer about a 27mile sheen report offshore.  Follow-up information indicated that the report had originated from a Customs & Border Patrol overflight at 0830hrs (Pacific) describing a 27mile by 1,000 foot feature that was “blue-gray” in color starting at 32deg 36.400N, 117deg 57.850W and continuing to 32deg 36.700N, 117deg 25.830W.  A separate vessel report of a fuel smell in the vicinity was provided during the early afternoon.  Sector San Diego requested NOAA trajectory support to direct an overflight at 1700hrs and to get a sense of approximate time and location of landfall, in the event the reported feature persists.  NESDIS also obtained imagery from two satellite passes during the day that appeared consistent with an anomaly in the area.
At 1014 hours local time on 8 June 2011, USCG Sector New Orleans notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a reported mystery slick WSW of Breton Island.  The size of slick is reported as “several miles” in length.  The initial information is sketchy, and the USCG has launched a helicopter and small boat to investigate as well as coordinating with the USFWS Breton Wildlife Refuge Manager.  No responsible party is yet known.  NOAA was requested to provide an Initial Trajectory Analysis and Resources at Risk analysis.  In 2005, this same refuge was impacted by a small spill resulting in the death of more than 600 pelican.  USFWS reports that there are nearly 7000 pelican on North Breton Island currently and this is nesting season.
During the evening of June 5, a privately-owned pleasure craft grounded at the tip of the Gateway National Park, Sandy Hook, NJ.  The vessel is 50ft in length and is carrying 100 gallons of gasoline.  USCG Sector New York contacted NOAA Duty Officer to report incident. Vessel had grounded on NPS lands in an area currently closed to the public due to on-going piping plover, oyster catcher, and tern nesting activities. Owner of vessel is in the process of making arrangements with Sea Tow to remove on-board gasoline this afternoon during low-tide.  An attempt to tow the vessel off the beach will be made after the fuel has been removed.  If effort to remove vessel is unsucessful, vessel will have to remain grounded until September which is the end of bird nexting season.
Sector San Juan on 31May11 reports CFS PAMPLONA, 475' container ship drifting 2 miles north of Barceloneta, PR. Vsl carrying 75 metric tonnes of diesel; swells 3-4', winds from NE, calm seas.  Spill trajectory requested.
This is a potential spill. The F/V Nor’Quest lost anchor on the evening of May 24, 2011 and started to drift ashore towards the Hagemeister Island. The vessel captain notified the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) at 3:15  AM on May 25, 2011. Located within Hagemeister Strait within Bristol Bay and approximately 15 miles S/W of Togiak, Alaska. Lat/Long: 58º44.700N, 160º52.900W. The vessel captain estimates that 16,800 – 18,800 gallons of diesel fuel, 200 gallons of gasoline, 200 gallons of lube oil, 300 gallons of hydraulic oil, and 110 gallons of waste oil are on board the vessel. USCG has conducted an overflight with a C-130 and reported no visible sheen in the area. In addition the USCG contacted the USCG Pacific Strike Team for possible lightering support. The F/V Nor’Quest was unable to remove itself from the grounding location on this morning’s high tide. A second vessel owned by SRW Marine Services attempted to attach a tow line to the vessel but was unable to safely approach close enough. USCG has requested that the vessel operator develop a fuel removal plan and a vessel salvage plan.. Alaska Chadux Corporation, a spill response contractor, has also been notified and has been asked to stand by to assist with any sensitive area protection and spill cleanup if necessary.  Vessel crew is attempting to cap the vessel fuel vents.On 29May at 2330 lightering ops commenced, and a total of 9,000 gallons of diesel was lightered off for a total of 12,000 gallons. 15 barrels of misc oils and 200 gallons of gasoline were removed from deck. Vessel was successfully refloated on 30May at 0430. Magone's divers have departed the scene. Intentions are to tow the vessel 3 miles off of Togiak Island to Nunavochak to anchor. A tow plan is to be submitted and upon plan approval and adequate weather conditions, the Nor'quest will be towed to Dutch Harbor. USCG personnel that was O/S is to arrive in Dillingham at 1700 30May, and both USCG members to return to Anchorage at 1530 on 01Jun [SEP] On 29May at 2330 lightering ops commenced, and a total of 9,000 gallons of diesel was lightered off for a total of 12,000 gallons. 15 barrels of misc oils and 200 gallons of gasoline were removed from deck. Vessel was successfully refloated on 30May at 0430. Magone's divers have departed the scene. Intentions are to tow the vessel 3 miles off of Togiak Island to Nunavochak to anchor. A tow plan is to be submitted and upon plan approval and adequate weather conditions, the Nor'quest will be towed to Dutch Harbor. USCG personnel that was O/S is to arrive in Dillingham at 1700 30May, and both USCG members to return to Anchorage at 1530 on 01Jun
At approximately 1700hrs on 18MAY2011 a Boeing 707 military refueling airplane crashed at the end of the runway at Naval Air Station Point Mugu. All crewmembers survived and the aircraft burned for a number of hours.  Initial reports indicated that none of the approx 25,000 gallons of JP-8 jet fuel on-board had reached the Ocean.  The next morning it became apparent that some of the JP-8 had entered the marsh area adjacent to the crash site and at 0830hrs on 19MAY2011 product was observed in the tidal channel under L Avenue (approx 1/3 mile from crash site).  Navy Region Southwest and USCG MSD Santa Barbara contacted the NOAA SSC to request information on oil persistence in the marsh complex and trajectory support.
NOAA ERD Duty Officer received a call that during the early morning of 17Mar2011 that the Towboat-Barge combination struck the Hwy 46 Mississippi R. Bridge at Helena, AR resulting in a 50 ft. long gash in the starboard side of the barge, and puncturing the #3 starboard cargo tank.  This tank contained approximately 2950BBL of aviation alkyates.  The towboat/barge combination continued down river 3 miles and has been secured to the right descending bank of the river.  An unknown amount of the material has been released into the river but as of this morning, all but 1116BBL have been lightered from the damaged cargo tank.NOAA ERD is providing scientific support to the USCG Sector Lower Mississippi for safety and environmental issues. Major concern is safety, not environmental. Flash point of alkylate is 20F according to Flat Hills Research MSDS.
Late morning on 09MAR, USCG Marine Safety Detachment (MSD) Santa Barbara contacted the Regional SSC requesting hindcast trajectory support for oil reported on San Buenaventura State Beach near Ventura, CA.  The USCG and the State of California’s Office of Spill Prevention & Response (OSPR) had already been responding to a small pipeline release from the previous day that had been secured and undergoing shoreline cleanup near Javon Canyon, approximately 6miles upcoast.   No recoverable oil had been observed by shoreworkers or from USCG overflight during yesterday’s reconnaissance and cleanup operations.  The hindcast was requested to determine if the oil on San Buenaventura State Beach might be related to the Javon Canyon spill or from some other source (natural or otherwise).
Sunday morning, March 6, the NOAA Alaska SSC was notified that the 58' F/V Capt Andrew, due to human error, had grounded on a rocky shoreline west of King Cove, Alaska, with 5 POB.   The vessel had 2000 gallons of diesel onboard as well as a cargo of 110K to 120K cod.  No release of the fuel nor the cargo had occurred as of Sunday night A good Sam vessel was able to rescue to 5 POB the grounded vessel, and reliable Dan Magone from Dutch Harbor was hired to remove the fuel and conduct salvage on the vessel unground it.   His ETA on scene is estimated to be Monday evening, March 7.  The Coast Guard requested that NOAA keep them abreast of the weather throughout this incident.   At the time of the grounding, the weather was small craft advisories with NE winds, 30 kt, seas 10 feet.   A Coast Guard overflight is slated for Monday afternoon, March 7.  On Thursday, March 10, 2011, salvors completed removal of all recoverable petroleum products from the vessel. They estimate that they removed approximately 1,200 gallons of fuel and oils from the vessel. A more precise volume will be determined when the fluids are offloaded in Dutch Harbor.  No impacts to wildlife have been reported.No impacts to historic or cultural resources have been identified at this time.Commercial fisheries operating in the area should not be affected and no closures have been initiated.
A gasoline release of estimated 6000 Bbls was released from a ruptured pipeline in Texas City, TX. Reports are the gasoline is entering a creek that feeds to Galveston Bay. Responders are on scene. NOAA SSC is standing by to assist if requested.
Coast Guard Sector Anchorage notified NOAA ERD that the F/V Midnite Son had grounded on the western coast of Afognak Island (58-16.36N, 153-05.62W) due to heavy winds from the NW with 5 POB. The vessel is taking on water and is breaking up on the beach.  Air Station Kodiak rescued all 5 POB.  The vessel has a capacity of 6000 gallons diesel.  The CG asked NOAA for a verbal and written statement regarding the possible fate and transport of any release oil.
ON 0530 08FEB2011 THE F/V TERRIGAIL LOST PROPULSIONON THE NORTH SIDE OF UNALASKA ISLAND. 0948 08FEB2011 F/V TERRIGAILDRAGGED ANCHOR IN AN ATTEMPT TO SLOW VESSEL. THE ANCHOR CHAIN FAILED.1051 08FEB2011 USCGC MORGENTHOU ATTEMPTED TOWING OPERATIONS, HOWEVER,DUE TO WEATHER CONDITIONS, TOW LINE FOULED AROUND PORT SIDE SHAFT.TOWING OPERATION WERE CEASED AT 1107. 1450 08FEB2011 F/V TERRIGAILRAN AGROUND ON THE ROCKY SUBSTRATE ON THE WEST SHORE OF ALIMUDA BAY,UNALASKA ISLAND. VSL IS REPORTED TO HOLD APPROXIMATELY 800 GALLONS OFDIESEL.  NOAA WAS CONTACTED WED. FEB.9 AND ASKED FOR TRAJECTORY SUPPORT.  AS OF 25FEB11 THE OWNERS OF THE F/V TERRIGAIL HAD NOT PROVIDE AN APPROVEDLIGHTERING / SALVAGE PLAN. A NOTICE OF FEDERAL ASSUMPTION ISSUED.SECTOR ANCHORAGE SUBMITED AN AUTHORIZATION TO PROCEED TO MAGONEMARINE TO CONDUCT A PRELIMINARY SITE ASSESSMENT AND DEVELOP A lightering and salvage plan.       A. OVERVIEW: MAGONE MARINE (MM) CONDUCTED DIVE OPERATIONS ON 06MAY AND DETERMINED BOTH PORT AND STARBOARD SIDE FUEL TANKS OF F/V TERRIGALE WERE BOTH COMPROMISED.  APPROX 10 GALS OIL/WATER MIXTURE WERE RECOVERED FROM STARBOARD TANKS. AS A RESULT, IT IS DEDUCED THAT PRACTIALLY ALL THE 800 GALLONS OF DIESEL ENTERED THE ENVIROMENT.  CASE CLOSED.  O/S WX: TODAY NW WIND 30 KT DIMINISHING TO 20 KT IN THE AFTERNOON. GUSTS TO 45 KT IN THE MORNING. SEAS 13 FT SUBSIDING TO 9 FT. RAIN SHOWERS. VISIBILITY 7 NM OCCASIONALLY REDUCED TO 4 NM IN RAIN SHOWERS. HIGH NEAR 35. TONIGHT NW WIND 15 KT. SEAS 7 FT. WEATHER FORECAST:  LOW NEAR 31. THURSDAY NW WIND 30 KT DIMINISHING TO 20 KT IN THE AFTERNOON. SEAS 8 FT. HIGH NEAR 35. FRIDAY NW WIND 30 KT. SEAS 10 FT. SATURDAY W WIND 25 KT. SEAS 14 FT.RAR: RESOURCES AT RISK: THREATENED NORTHERN SEA OTTER AND STELLER'S  EIDER ARE BOTH PRESENT IN THIS AREA. CONCENTRATIONS OF WINTERING WATERFOWL INCLUDING EMPEROR GEESE AND HARLEQUIN DUCK. OTHER WATER BIRDS INCLUDE: SCOOTERS, LONG-TAILED DUCK, CORMORANTS. HABITAT 	IS ROCKY INTERTIDAL AND GRAVEL BEACHES.     H. ECONOMIC IMPACT: N/A     I. KEY STAKEHOLDER ISSUES: QAWALANGIN TRIBAL REQUESTS UPDATES, AND ALASKA DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES ENACTED THE ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSULTATION WITH USCG AS PER ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT. NOAA TRAJECTORY AND FATE FORECAST:  As a result of predicted heavy weather conditions, 800 gallons of diesel is expected to rapidly evaporate and disperse, and will persist for only 3-6 hours under these weather conditions     C. FACILITY DATA: N/A     D. OWNER/OPERATOR/AGENT: DUANE FREEMAN      E. SAR STATUS: CASE CLOSED     F. CG RESOURCES SUMMARY: NONE     G.
On Monday January 31, 2011, The NOAA SSC covering District 8 was notified of recent reports of unknown bright orange-pink substances in and around Panama City, FL.  On January 27th USCG unit Panama City, FL investigated the report of an orange-pink substance floating in St. Andrews Marina, near Panama City, FL.  The substance had no oily smell and in addition to floating, some of the material was present below the surface. It was also noted to be phosphorescent.  A sample was taken but not sent off to be analysed for oil.  On Sunday, January 30th, USCG received reports and photos of a similar material offshore of Panama City 6, 10 and 12 miles.  Based on the description, the NOAA SSC suspected an algal bloom, which has since been confirmed as Noctiluca scintillans, a non-photosynthetic, bioluminescent, and generally non-toxic algae that commonly blooms at this time of year, as well as other seasons.  This hotline report is being opened to capture the information for reference and in the event responders to the DWH Gulf Oil Spill receive inquiries on if the event is related to it.On February 18, additional reports of algal blooms have been coming into USCG and Florida Wildlife Commission (FWC) all across the FL Panhandle. FWC's Harmfull Algal Bloom team is monitoring the situation.
On January 6th NESDIS provided NOAA Emergency Response Division with a satelitte analysis showing an anomaly consistent with an oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico located at 28deg 54' 28"N, 89deg 49' 23"W, or about 25 miles SSE of Barataria Bay, LA.  A report from BOEMRE confirms that an oil slick has been reported at that location, so confidence is high.  USCG Sector NOLA/Morgan City have been provided this information, weather, and an initial trajectory analysis. The initial trajectory indicates that winds and currents should keep the oil offshore so that it is not expected to be a threat to land at least throught the coming weekend.  For additional information, contact Jim Jeasonne at jim.jeansonne@noaa.gov or 206-276-5308.
On the evening of 16 November 2010, NOAA was contacted by MSU Port Arthur relative to a reported pipeline failure near Vinton, LA.  The reported position is on the N side of the ICW.  The adjacent area is brackish marsh and an active area for migratory waterfowl.  The pipeline was being shut in, but given that it was dusk when reported, no clear assessment can be made until daylight.  The RP has initiated a response and responders are expected on-scene tonight.  Worse case potential release is reported as 1,500 bbls.
We received a report that the M/V CSL METIS (7926162) went aground while approaching the AES Facility in Guayama.  The approximate location was 17-55.19N 066-09.44W. The vessel was pulled off via tug boats prior to receiving the report.  It is a dry bulk vessel carrying coal, but it has approximately 270K gallons of #6 Fuel Oil on board.  No indication of pollution at this point.
The ERD emergency spill line was contacted with a request for a trajectory analysis for a potential release from a barge grounded on St. Kitts Island. The barge is carrying 18,000 gal of diesel fuel. The location was given as 17°17'22.5"N--062°42'40.5"W. That location is in Basseterre Harbor, on the southern side of St. Kitts.
On Thursday night, 29 September 2010, the NOAA SSC was notified by MSU Galveston of a well leak in the Gulf of Mexico.  The location is far offshore (more than 100 miles SSE of Galveston, Texas) and roughly 25 miles W of the West Bank of the Flower Garden National Marine Sanctuary. The RP stated the well, when producing, was primarily a gas well; there was an observation of some oil or condensate coming from the well that created a 10 mile light sheen yesterday.
At approximately 2115 CDT on July 26, 2010, the two barges Kirby 28083 and Kirby 30001 collided at Mississippi River Marker 774. Each barge carried an estimated 25,000 barrels of Acrylonitrile (ACN). It remains unknown the total quantity of product released into this remote section of the Mississippi River about 40 miles north of Memphis, TN. Three employees were hospitalized due to injuries caused by product exposure. No fatalities reported. Coast Guard Sector Lower Mississippi River requested support from NOAA SSC.
At approximately 0050 CDT on July 27, 2010, the dredge barge Captain Buford pushed by T/V Pere Ana C collided with the abandoned Cedyco Corporation natural gas wellhead - SL 8357 Number 1 well (SN 170436). The collision occurred while the tug and barge combination exited Mud Lake into the Barataria Waterway halfway between Lafitte and Grand Isle, Louisiana. As a result of the impact, the well is discharging natural gas mixed with light crude oil 50-100 feet into the air at an unknown rate. It may take 1-2 days to cap the leak. The NOAA Gulf Region SSC is on scene at Sector New Orleans to provide support for this incident.
On the morning of July 26, 2010, a failure occurred in a 30-inch diameter pipeline releasing approximately 19,500 barrels of crude oil into a tributary creek of the Kalamazoo River in Marshall, MI. EPA requested weather forecast information to assist with air monitoring. NOAA provided trajectory support to Coast Guard Sector Lake Michigan to determine if/when oil may reach the COTP zone on the Kalamazoo River.
At approximately 1400L on the afternoon of July 26, 2010, the 98-foot wooden F/V Cape Cross ran aground on an uncharted pinnacle in Prince William Sound’s Main Bay, Alaska. MSU Valdez notified the NOAA Alaska SSC. Early in the morning of July 27, 2010, the vessel rolled and partially sank but remained grounded. Product on board includes 3000 gallons diesel, 300 gallons lube oil, and 100 gallons hydraulic oil. The fuel tanks appear to be undamaged. With the only reported damage to the engine room, bilge slops were the most likely source of the sheen observed initially. No additional release reported at this time. Salvage crew already on scene. Since Main Bay is the site of one of the major Prince William Sound fish hatcheries, the hatchery will be boomed using prepositioned boom anchors.  No immediate assistance was requested from NOAA.
Grounded in Houston Ship summary with 15,158 metric tons of cyclohexane.  No leak.  The hope is to refloat the vessel without incident.
Florida commands, Deepwater Horizon response. See "Deepwater Horizon" incident for summary and stats. The Florida Peninsula Incident Command Post (FPIC) was officially established on 02 June 2010. USCG Sectors St Petersberg,Key West, Miami, and Jacksonville are assigned as branches to the FPIC. The ICP relocated from the USCG Seventh District to a leased office space in downtown Miami at 1001 Biscayne Bay Drive (AON building) on 5 June. [SEP] Included here, and attached as a PDF file at page bottom, is an update of NOAA's support activities for the Deepwater Horizon (Mississippi Canyon 252) BP oil spill incident. Credit: NOAA. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- NOAA Web Update July 22, 2010 DEEPWATER HORIZON Incident Situation: Thursday 22 July ???€? STATEMENT BY NATIONAL INCIDENT COMMANDER ADMIRAL THAD ALLEN ON TROPICAL STORM BONNIE "Due to the risk that Tropical Storm Bonnie poses to the safety of the nearly 2,000 people responding to the BP oil spill at the well site, many of the vessels and rigs will be preparing to move out of harm's way beginning tonight. This includes the rig drilling the relief well that will ultimately kill the well, as well as other vessels needed for containment. Some of the vessels may be able to remain on site, but we will err on the side of safety. As I stated earlier today, I have directed BP to continue with the well shut in procedure while the work to kill the well is temporarily suspended. I have also directed BP to take measures to ensure the vessels operating the ROV's are the last to leave, and the first to return in order to maximize monitoring of the well. Monitoring of the site during the well integrity test remains one of the government's highest priorities. While these actions may delay the effort to kill the well for several days, the safety of the individuals at the well site is our highest concern. We are staging our skimming vessels and other assets in a manner that will allow us to promptly re-start oil mitigation efforts as soon as the storm passes and we can ensure the safety of our personnel." NOAA RESPONSE Fact Sheet: What to Expect in South Florida from the Deepwater Horizon/BP Oil Spill (http://response.restoration.noaa.gov/book_shelf/2244_what_to_expect_in_southflo rida.pdf; PDF, 400K). NOAA provides coordinated scientific weather and biological response services to federal, state, and local organizations. Experts from across the agency have mobilized to help contain the spreading oil spill and protect the Gulf of Mexico???€?s many marine mammals, sea turtles, fish, shellfish, and other endangered marine life. NOAA spill specialists are advising the U.S. Coast Guard on cleanup options, as well as advising all affected federal, state and local partners on sensitive marine resources at risk in this area of the Gulf of Mexico. Overflights are conducted on a daily basis (weather permitting) to provide field verification of model trajectories. NOAA???€?s Office of Marine and Aviation Operations (OMAO) is supporting the response work in the Gulf with NOAA-owned ships and aircraft. Currently, NOAA has deployed six NOAA-owned vessels in response to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. Please see GeoPlatform.gov/gulfresponse (http://www.geoplatform.gov/gulfresponse/index.html) for further information on the federal response to the Deepwater Horizon Incident. TRAJECTORIES Winds are forecast to be ENE on Friday at 10-15 knots, and then begin increasing as a tropical depression moves into the north central Gulf. On Saturday, winds are forecast to be E/SE at 20-30 knots, then decrease on Sunday to 10-15 knots. Today???€?s overflights and aerial imagery indicate the surface oil is continuing to break up into numerous patches. Trajectories indicate the leading edge to the north will continue to move northwestward into Breton Sound and towards the Chandeleur Islands. Oil moving westward around the Mississippi Delta is collecting in the convergence line associated with the fresh water outflow ???€? this oil will continue moving westward, threatening the Delta and shorelines west to Caillou Bay. OR&R???€?s modeling team continues to generate daily trajectories for the nearshore surface oil. The offshore trajectory maps (showing oil interacting with the Loop Current) have been temporarily suspended because the northern end of the Loop Current has been pinched off into a large eddy (Eddy Franklin) so there is no clear path for oil to enter the Loop Current from the source. Also, there have been no reports of recoverable oil in the Loop Current or Eddy Franklin and the oil has moved to the north and away from the Eddy Franklin. We will continue to monitor the area with overflights, vessel observations, and satellite analysis. When the threat of shoreline impacts to the Florida Keys increases, we will resume producing the offshore trajectory maps. The Loop Current is an area of warm water that comes up from the Caribbean, flowing past the Yucatan Peninsula and into the Gulf of Mexico. It generally curves east across the Gulf and then flows south parallel to the west Florida coast. An eddy is water that rotates. CLOSURES The July 13 closure remains in effect. (See map at http://sero.nmfs.noaa.gov/sf/deepwater_horizon/BP_OilSpill_FisheryClosureMap_071 310.pdf.) All commercial and recreational fishing, including catch and release, is prohibited in the closed area; however, transit through the area is allowed. The current closure measures 83,927 square miles (217,371 square kilometers) and covers about 35% of the Gulf of Mexico exclusive economic zone. The majority of federal waters in the Gulf of Mexico are open to commercial and recreational fishing. Modeling and mapping the actual and projected spill area is not an exact science. NOAA Fisheries Service strongly advises fishermen not to fish in areas where oil or oil sheens (very thin layers of floating oil) are present, even if those areas are not currently closed to fishing. Any changes to the closure are announced daily at 12 p.m. Eastern at http://sero.nmfs.noaa.gov/deepwater_horizon_oil_spill.htm and take effect at 6 p.m. Eastern the same day. SEA TURTLES AND MARINE MAMMALS (effective July 21, 2010) A total of 709 sea turtles have been verified from April 30 to July 21 within the designated spill area from the Texas/Louisiana border to Apalachicola, Florida. One dead turtle stranding was reported in Louisiana. Nine hatchling turtles were released in Florida from nests that were moved from the northern Gulf of Mexico. There are 207 live sea turtles in rehabilitation centers. These include 164 sea turtles captured as part of the on-water survey and rescue operations, and 43 turtles that stranded alive. A total of 184 stranded or captured turtles have had visible evidence of external oil since verifications began on April 30. These include 167 that are alive and 17 that are dead. All others have not had visible evidence of external oil. Of the 709 turtles verified from April 30 to July 21, a total of 478 stranded turtles were found dead, 58 stranded alive. Four of those subsequently died. Eleven live stranded turtles were released, and 43 live stranded turtles are being cared for at rehabilitation centers. Turtle strandings during this time period have been much higher in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and the Florida Panhandle than in previous years for this same time period. This may be due in part to increased detection and reporting, but this does not fully account for the increase. The NOAA Ship Pisces reported a dead 25-foot sperm whale on June 15, 2010, that was located 150 miles due south of Pascagoula, Mississippi, and approximately 77 miles due south of the spill site last week. The whale was decomposed and heavily scavenged. Samples of skin and blubber have been taken and will be analyzed. The whale had no evidence of external oil. Sperm whales are the only endangered resident cetacean in the Upper Gulf of Mexico. There are no records of stranded whales in the Gulf of Mexico for the month of June for the period 2003-2007. From April 30 to July 21, 66 stranded dolphins have been verified in the designated spill area. Of the 66 strandings, five were live strandings, three of which died shortly after stranding, one was released and one is in rehabilitation. Sixty-one dolphins were found stranded dead. Visible evidence of external oil was confirmed on four dolphins. We are unable at this time to determine whether the three dead stranded dolphins were externally oiled before or after death. Since April 30, the stranding rate for dolphins in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and the Florida Panhandle has been higher than the historic numbers for the same time period in previous years. In part, this may be due to increased detection and reporting and the lingering effects of an earlier observed spike in strandings for the winter of 2010. A stranding is defined as a dead or debilitated animal that washes ashore or is found in the water. NOAA and its partners are analyzing the cause of death for the dead stranded and dead captured sea turtles and the stranded marine mammals. This report contains corrections based on new information. The status of one live dolphin was changed from oiled to unoiled based on further evaluation. ASSESSMENT To help determine the type and amount of restoration needed
At approximately 0430hrs (local) on 20APR2010, the 58foot F/V Pacific Bully ran aground near the Santa Ana Jetty, south of Huntington Beach, CA with 600-700gallons of diesel and 40tons of sardines on board.  No signs of pollution have been reported from overflights or by personnel on-scene and her tanks are being sounded regularly to monitor fuel levels.  The NOAA SSC had been notified initially by USCG's D-11 Command Center.  Subsequent discussions with USCG Sector LA/LB personnel resulted in a request for a oil fate & trajectory estimates as a precaution in the event the vessel cannot be removed during the afternoon's high tide.
On 18 March 2010, NOAA Emergency Response Division was notified by USCG Sector Guam, via email, of tarballs coming ashore at Ritidian Point-on the island's northern end.  (13° 39.5'N by 144° 51.8'W).  NOAA Scientific Support Team was requested to provide a hindcast trajectory to help better evaluate possible sources.
The SS Princess kathleen is a well-known wreck in the Juneau area, which sunk on Sept. 7, 1952.  The Princess Kathleen ran aground on Pt Lena just outside Juneau and then sank just off the point with an unknown quantity of Fuel oil in her tanks.  From a time shortly after her sinking to today, she has been leaking fuel oil into the surrounding waters.   Recent increases in the sightings of small oil blobs in the area of Lena Pt. resulted in Sector Juneau's decision to seriously evaluate the wreck for possible removal of the remaining fuel, which is very roughly estimated at 155,000 gallons of bunker C.  On Feb. 16, 2010, Global Offshore Divers of Anchorage mobilized a three-man remote operated vehicle crew to Juneau in response to a request by the USCG, Sector Juneau's Incident management, to survey the wreck of this vessel.   The survey lasted a total of three days from Feb. 17-19 with two ROV's, and the first entry in this Hotline is the Global Diving report from those surveys.    After mobilization of equipment from Seattle, Global Diving tentatively hopes to start pumping oil on or about March 5.  NOAA has been asked to provide weather and trajectory support for this incident. All operations progressed methodically, and hence most of the fuel was successfully removed.
At 0915 on 23JAN2010, NOAA Emergency Response Division was notified by the NWS Weather Forecast Office (WFO)in Lake Charles, LA of a collision between a crude oil tanker (T/V Eagle Otome) and a barge in Port Arthur, TX.  The contents of the barge are not currently known.  USCG informed the NOAA SSC that they suspected H2S had been released.  The tanker was reported to contain crude oil with a capacity of several hundred thousand barrels.  According to local news reports, the collision occurred shortly before 10:00 AM local time.  Local law enforcement informed the WFO that noxious fumes were coming from both vessels and that they have initiated evacuations of residents and workers in and around the Port of Port Arthur. The WFO has produced a dilution contour plume footprint using HYSPLIT.  The Sabine-Neches Ship Channel and Intracoastal Waterway have been closed.  Local Emergency Management will be conducting a helicopter overflight to get photographs and video.  Two NOAA SSC’s are en route. [SEP] PORT ARTHUR, Texas - The Eagle Otome, an 807-foot Singapore flagged tank ship, is held in place by tug vessels, Jan. 25, 2010. A collision between Eagle Otone the towing vessel Dixie Vengeance and the two barges that it was pushing Jan. 23, 2010, spilled an estimated 450,000 gallons of crude oil into the Sabine Neches Waterway. A Unified Command has been established and clean-up crews have begun the clean-up process. U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 2nd Class Prentice Danner. [SEP] Ships collide, evacuation order lifted in Port Arthur Comments 30 | Recommend 32 January 23, 2010 10:14 AM Scott Lawrence - KFDM News 6pm Update: Port Arthur Police have lifted a mandatory evacuation that was ordered after a collision between a tanker carrying crude oil and a barge near the Port caused crude oil to pour from a compartment at the bow of the tanker, according to information provided to KFDM News by the U.S. Coast Guard, Port Arthur Police and Jefferson County Emergency Management. The Coast Guard has reported that as much as 450,000 gallons of oil may have spilled into the water following the collision at about 9:30 a.m. Saturday. Authorities in Port Arthur say the spillage might be much smaller, perhaps 1,000 barrels or about 40,000 gallons. Shortly before 6 p.m., Port Arthur authorities lifted a mandatory evacuation. Sgt. Ken Carona with Port Arthur Police told KFDM News the evacuation was done as a precaution due to hydrogen sulfide gas emitted from the oil. Carona says it's a nuisance and the levels aren't hazardous. The gas smells like rotten eggs and can be hazardous at high levels, causing eye irritation, a sore throat and cough, and shortness of breath when a person is exposed to small amounts. Breathing high levels of the gas can be lethal. Carona says firefighters constantly monitored levels of the gas and it never rose to unsafe levels. Port Arthur Police evacuated a 28 square block area from Canal to 7th as well as Houston Avenue to Beaumont Avenue, and Port personnel, as a precaution. A shelter was opened at 1308 9th Avenue for evacuees. The Sabine-Neches Ship Channel and Intracoastal Waterway will be closed near the Port, according to Emergency Management Coordinator Greg Fountain. The waterway is a vital link between Southeast Texas crude and refineries that need the crude to process into oil. Port Arthur Police Chief Mark Blanton says the barge crew was removed from the ship and taken to the Port Arthur Police Department while authorities removed the tanker crew. No injuries were reported. The U.S. Coast Guard is overseeing the investigation. The Coast Guard and Texas General Land Office will oversee the oil cleanup. Fountain says Emergency Management used the Jefferson County Sheriff's Office helicopter to get photographs and video to assist Port Arthur Police and the Coast Guard. According to the latest information from Fountain, who completed a flyover of the scene early Saturday afternoon, and the Coast Guard, the 800 foot tanker Eagle Otome from Singapore was carrying crude oil inbound. Fountain says the crew lost the ability to control the tanker. According to Fountain, the Otome struck a vessel docked at the Port, and he says a towboat pushing barges then struck the Eagle Otome. The collision left a 15-by-8-foot hole in the Eagle Otome. "They hit starboard bow to starboard bow, like cars hitting on the right side and head on," said Fountain. "The barge is stuck in the bow of the Eagle Otome. There is a substantial oil spill the width of the waterway, about 400 feet wide and two to three hundred yards long. A sheen goes back another quarter mile. A large amount of oil appears to be coming from the bow of the ship. Those kind of ships typically carry millions of gallons of oil, but the ship is comparmentalized and the oil coming out should only be from the damaged compartment." The Coast Guard says a portion of the oil in the damaged tank has been moved to another holding tank on the ship. Stay with KFDM News for the latest on the story. PORT ARTHUR, Texas - From U.S. Coast Guard - The Coast Guard and agency partners have formed a Unified Command in response to an oil spill in the Port of Port Arthur, Saturday. Vessel Traffic Service Port Arthur received notification at 9:30 a.m. reporting a collision between the towing vessel Dixie Vengeance and the two barges it was pushing, and the 807-foot tank ship Eagle Otome. As a result of the collision, the Eagle Otome sustained damage in the vicinity of the number one starboard tank, which was reported to be loaded with crude oil. The initial estimate of spilled oil is 450,000 gallons. The Sabine Neches Waterway is closed to all vessel traffic along the City of Port Arthur's river front from Intracoastal Waterway mile marker 276 to mile marker 289. The Coast Guard has established a perimeter around the vessels in the vicinity of the reported spill to ensure the safety of the vessels involved as well as the safety of the responders. No injuries have been reported. The investigation to the cause is on-going. Additional resources on scene include: 3 contracted boom vessels 4,000 feet of boom deployed with 10,000 feet of boom available Coast Guard Cutter Manowar 4, 25-foot Response Boat-Small from Coast Guard Station Sabine Pass Coast Guard Air Station Houston MH-65C helicopter crew [SEP] UPDATE #3: Unified Command responds to Port Arthur oil spill PORT ARTHUR, Texas - The following information contains recent updates from Jan. 25, 2010 regarding the Port Arthur oil spill. * 220,053 gallons of oil have been recovered, evaporated or dispersed naturally. * Approximately 9 miles of shoreline have been impacted * Two oiled birds have been reported, one has been captured and is being cleaned * 59,800 feet of boom has been deployed * 27 skimming vessels are on scene * 36 vessels are on scene to deploy and work boom * The Texas Responder, a 210-foot oil recovery vessel, is on scene * Approximately 550 people are responding Lightering for the barges, which were being pushed by the towing vessel Dixie Vengeance at the time of the incident are scheduled to begin at 9:30 a.m. Lightering operations for the tank vessel Eagle Otome are scheduled to begin today as well. No injuries have been reported. To report oiled wildlife please contact 1-888-709-9798. The public should not attempt to capture any oiled wildlife. A claims number has been established for this incident. To report a claim, please call 866-310-3831. The Coast Guard is conducting a joint investigation with the NTSB into the incident, and all parties are fully participating. ### [SEP] PORT ARTHUR, Texas - A worker from Environmental Safety and Health (ES&H) stands on the bow of an oil-skimming vessel during operations to clean up a 450,000-gallon oil spill in the Sabine Neches waterway, Jan. 24, 2010. The spill was the result of an early morning collision between the tank vessel Eagle Otome and a barge being pushed by the towing vessel Dixie Vengeance at approximately 9 a.m. Jan. 23, 2010 U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Tom Atkeson [SEP] Olmeca Crude from Mexico. API from ADIOS is 39.8 [SEP] Link to USCG video from 23JAN2010 http://cgvi.uscg.mil/media/main.php?g2_view=core.DownloadItem&g2_itemId=762082 [SEP] Photo Credit: US Coast Guard [SEP] 26Jan2010 15:46 CST photo by CChilds, NOAA [SEP] Photo of oiled shoreline courtesy of Mary Gill, NOAA. [SEP] Photo Credit: US Coast Guard [SEP] 26Jan2010 15:46 CST photo by CChilds, NOAA [SEP] PORT ARTHUR, Texas - The tank vessel Eagle Otome moves from the scene of the Port Arthur Oil Spill with the assistance of towing vessels. The Eagle Otome is in route to Beaumont. More than 530 responders are coordinating efforts to clean the Sabine-Neches waterway to prevent harm to the environment and reopen the waterway to vessel traffic. U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Tom Atkeson
On the evening of Friday, 1/1/10, the F/V Sheila Renee ran aground outside of Oregon Inlet, NC.  She is a 77 foot long, 179,000 gt vessel, carrying 4000 gal of diesel fuel plus over a hundred gallons of engine oil, and hydraulic fluid. Vessel located about 150 yards from Bonner Bridge. Vessel slowly drifting towards bridge. Incident has been federalized by NPFC. RP does not have funds to cover costs of getting salvage vessel on-scene. USCG is in the process of contracting with salvage company to get salvage vessel on-scene. [SEP] The 77-foot fishing trawler that was stuck on a sandbar off the Outer Banks has been freed and was towed out to open water. The vessel Sheila Rene was freed Sunday evening after getting stuck Friday night on the Oregon Inlet bar, according to the Coast Guard. A crew was not able to free the boat Friday night. About 7 a.m. Saturday, three people and a dog from the Sheila Rene were hoisted from a boat by helicopter because of worsening weather conditions. The trawler came free, but got stuck again about 9 a.m. About 8:30 p.m. Sunday, the Sheila Rene was refloated and under tow back to open water, the Coast Guard said. The Coast Guard will remain with the trawler through the night and it should be towed back to Wanchese on Monday
On the evening of December 23, 2009, the tanker escort tug Pathfinder ran aground on Bligh Reef, Prince William Sound, Alaska. The vessel has 127,000 gallons of diesel on board.  The center bottom tank, containing 22,000 gallons, is ruptured and an unknown amount has spilled. Bligh Reef was the site of the 1989 grounding and spill of the tanker Exxon Valdez.  USCG has requested scientific support including trajectory of the spilled fuel oil. [SEP] Map [SEP] Coast Guard photo of Valdez Star skimming in sheen off of Glacier Island [SEP] Bligh Reef sea man station. This is on W side of Bligh I. [SEP] Wind obs from mid sound buoy [SEP] Looks like 6??C for Sea Surface Temp in PWS. [SEP] Other vessels include the Crowley/Alyeska response tug Alert and the USCG Cutter Long Island. [SEP] Office of Public Affairs U.S. Coast Guard Seventeenth District United States Coast Guard Date: Dec. 24, 2009 Contact: 907-321-4505 Petty Officer 3rd Class Charly Hengen News Release Coast Guard responding to tug grouding in Prince William Sound VALDEZ, Alaska ???€? Coast Guard personnel from Marine Safety Unit Valdez, Sector Anchorage and Cutter Long Island are responding to a 136-foot Crowley tug grounding on Bligh Reef in Prince William Sound Thursday. The Pathfinder crew had completed an ice survey and was heading back to its port in Valdez when the vessel struck the reef Wednesday evening. Vessel Traffic System Prince William Sound personnel received a radio call at 6:15 p.m. from Pathfinder???€?s master via VHF radio reporting the grounding. The Pathfinder cleared the reef and proceeded to deeper waters at about 6:50 p.m. Anchoring just south of Busby Island, the tug???€?s six crewmembers reportedly deployed 200-feet of fuel containment booms around the vessel. Two of the tug???€?s centerline diesel fuel tanks were reported breached with a potential spill of 33,500 gallons. The total capacity of the vessel is approximately127,700 gallons of diesel fuel. None of the crewmembers were reported injured. The tugboat Invader and oil recovery boat Valdez Star are enroute to the location of the grounding to offer any possible assistance. Two divers were tranported by the landing signal craft Alaska Challenge. Divers conducted an underwater survey of the Pathfinder???€?s hull at approximately 2:30 a.m. but have not provided a report yet. A Coast Guard Air Station Kodiak H-C130 Hercules aircraft is scheduled to conduct a overflight Thursday about 10 a.m. The Pathfinder is a Crowley Marine Services docking and escort tug for the Trans Alaska Pipeline System Tankers. MSU Valdez is investigating the cause of the grounding. Two tankers departing the Port of Valdez have been delayed to allow for Coast Guard and other response vessels to operate. [SEP] Pathfinder Sitrep: Dec. 24, 2009 noon 1. CAUSE OF SPILL: The tug had completed an ice survey and was headed back to port at the time of the grounding. The cause of the grounding is unknown at this time and is being investigated by USCG and ADEC. 2. RESPONSE ACTIONS : Spill containment boom was immediately deployed around the vessel. The initial visual survey did not indicate any damage to the sides of the hull. A sheen was observed coming from the keel coolers of the tug. The tug transited to Busby Island and is currently anchored at that location. R & R Diving Services was immediately dispatched to conduct an underwater survey to assess the damage. The underwater survey was completed at 4:30 AM on December 24, 2009. The survey revealed that the tug suffered extensive damage under the hull during the grounding. Alyeska SERVS activated the Incident Management Team. Additional tugs were deployed to Busby Island to assist the Tug Pathfinder and to deploy boom around the vessel. Additional response equipment is either in place or enroute to the scene. 3. SOURCE CONTROL: Containment boom has been deployed around the vessel. The pressure of the sea water under the vessel???€?s hull is preventing further release of the fuel from the tug. Equipment is being mobilized to remove fuel from the tug. 4. RESOURCES AFFECTED: Marine waters of Prince William Sound. No oiled wildlife has been observed. 5. OVERFLIGHT: A first light overflight was completed by an Alyeska helo with no CG or State of Alaska personnel on board. No track line map of the survey is available, but supposedly they flew the entire area west of Bligh Reef and SW of Bligh Reef towards Naked Island. They reported only a single rainbow/gray sheen 3 miles X 39 yds, ?? of a mile off of eastern shore of Glacier Island. A second CG overflight will commence around noon today. [SEP] CROWLEY TUG PATHFINDER, BLIGH REEF, PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND, AK 0930, Thursday December 24, 2009 Sunset (12/24): 1530 Sunrise (12/25): 1000 Sunset (12/5): 1531 _____________________________________ Forecast: Today: winds are expected to be from the E-NE at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the E-NE at 15-25 knots with gust to 35 knots. Friday and Friday night: winds are predicted to be from the E-NE at 15-25 knots with gust to 35 knots. Saturday through Sunday: winds are forecast to be from the E-NE at 15-25 knots with gust to 35 knots. Precipitation: Today: chance of rain. Tonight through Sunday: rain showers are expected for the region. Seas: Today through Sunday: seas are expected to be 4-6 feet. [SEP] Alyeska Valdez Star skimming in silver sheen off Glacier Island [SEP] Incident Summary: On the evening of December 23, 2009, the tanker escort tug PATHFINDER ran aground on Bligh Reef, Prince William Sound, Alaska. The incident occurred at 6:15 PM Alaska Standard Time. The 136 foot tug is owned by Crowley Marine Services. The PATHFINDER is a docking and escort tug for the Trans Alaska Pipeline System. The vessel had completed an ice survey and was heading back to its port in Valdez when the vessel struck the reef. The tug cleared the reef under its own power and proceeded to anchor in deeper waters. The vessel has 127,000 gallons of diesel on board. Two tanks, with a total capacity of 33,500 gallons, have reportedly been breached and an unknown amount has spilled. For initial modeling purposes, we are assuming that between 20,000 and 100,000 gallons have been released. The PATHFINDER is now anchored just south of Busby Island. An underwater hull survey is being conducted and an overflight is planned at first light (approximately 10 am AST). Bligh Reef is the site of the 1989 grounding and spill from the tanker Exxon Valdez. Media interest is expected to be high because of the grounding location. NOAA Activities: At 10 pm PST, the U.S. Coast Guard notified the NOAA Emergency Response Division (ERD) in Seattle and requested scientific support including trajectory of the spilled fuel oil. ERD has opened an incident hotline at https://responselink.orr.noaa.gov/hotline/incidents/8166. The hotline can be accessed by anyone with a NOAA email account. NOAA Weather Service is providing forecast information. Summary NOAA Trajectory Analysis and Weather Forecast: At the time of the grounding, winds were 18-23 knots with 8 foot seas. The winds and seas dropped overnight but by noon today (12/24), winds are expected to increase to 25 knots from the NE with 4 - 6 foot seas. By evening winds are expected to be 25 ???€? 30 knots with seas 5 - 6 feet. The winds and waves will naturally disperse the diesel into the water column and unless the additional tanks on the vessel are breached, shoreline impacts are expected to be minimal. NOAA oil spill models indicate that with 25 knot winds and 5 foot seas 80 - 90 % of the oil would evaporate and naturally disperse within 6 - 8 hours. We expect a visible sheen oriented downwind for about 3 - 5 miles. Some scattered sheens may reach Glacier I to the west (6.5 nm away) by sunrise today but it is unlikely to result in any noticeable beach impacts. No other shoreline impacts are expected from a 20,000 gallon diesel spill under the forecast winds. However, if the spill volume is closer to 100,000 gallons, sheens could persist long enough to affect shorelines on Glacier Island, Naked Island, and Storey Island, about 16 nm to the SW. Future Activities: NOAA ERD will continue to support the USCG and provide updated weather and trajectory information. The overflight and hull survey efforts planned for this morning should provide a better indication of the magnitude of the spill and potential for shoreline impacts and need for longer term cleanup activities. Additional information is available at https://responselink.orr.noaa.gov. [SEP] Coast Guard Pol Rep #4 for evening, Dec. 26
This morning at 0605 EST DARRP was notified by USCG Sector San Juan that the 920' LNG Carrier Matthew grounded on a reef while in bound to Guayanilla, PR at approximately 0500EST.   The vessel's starboard bow was reported as aground.  While CG was establishing an IC and activated salvage teams the the vessel was able to free herself by transferring ballast and bunker fuel aft.  Three tugs were also on hand to assist.  CG reported the vessel was free 0812EST.   We have a NOAA contractor enroute to catch up with the CG investigators as well as to do an initial reef survey. [SEP] Map showing the location of the Matthew in relation to the island of Puerto Rico. [SEP] Photo - Damaged Coral [SEP] Michael Nemeth (under contract to NOAA through Sea Ventures) is currently with the USCG aboard the vessel gathering information on the incident and subsequent salvage. Sea Ventures personnel have also located the grounding site and in a brief update back relayed that "significant coral damage had occurred" and that the site was "three times larger then the Port Stewart". The Port Stewart is are most recently significant tanker grounding in Puerto Rico and likely impacted 1500 to 2000 sq. meters of reef. More information to follow this evening. [SEP] 920' LNG Carrier "Matthew" - Guayanilla, PR This morning at 0605 EST NOAA DARRP (T.Moore) was notified by USCG Sector San Juan that the 920' Liquid Natural Gas Carrier Matthew had grounded while inbound into the Eco Electrica Facility in Guayanilla, PR. The vessel was reported to have grounded in position 17 57.7N, 066 45.4W with a heading of 030. It was initially reported that the vessel was aground in its starboard bow. USCG also inquired if local NOAA staff might be available to respond on-scene in order to help prevent additional coral impacts during extraction. USCG also said they were establishing a formal response, standing up USCG salvage teams, and were requesting the vessel draw up lightening plans. We advised USCG that we knew of reef in the area (this is in the same general vicinity of the T/V Margara grounding) and advised that it would be prudent to make sure they had soundings on deeper water prior to vessel removal NOAA DARRP staff in PR are off the island, however we stood up the NOAA Response/Restoration support contract and had Dr. Michael Nemeth en-route at 0640EST. Dr. Nemeth original plans were to meet up with the DNER staff for transport to the vessel. USCG called back at 0812EST and informed me the vessel was off the reef and enroute to the dock. USCG requested that Dr. Nemeth meet up with the CG investigator at Eco Electrica and he is en-route to that location. We also currently have a dive team from our restoration support contractor en-route to the site for a preliminary investigation. It should be noted that the new NOAA ERMA System (Environmental Response Management Application) was very useful in getting overall situation awareness. We were able to view locations of the Matthew and the assist tugs using the near-real-time AIS Ship Tracker. [SEP] Photo - Damage Coral [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center [SEP] Attached is a plot of the location of the Matthew and the assist Tugs at 0807 EST via the AIS Ship Tracker on ERMA. [SEP] Photo - Crushed Coral [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center [SEP] Photo - Flattened Reef [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center
On 09DEC2009 at 1713 AST NOAA DARRP was notified by USCG of the grounding of the S/V RULING ANGEL via the email notification system.  The vessel, a 80' Custom Sailboat became disorientated as a squall hit and it subsequently grounding on Round Reef just to the north of Christiansted Harbor in St. Croix, USVI.   The vessel has 800 gallon of Diesel in its tanks, which are secure.  After 6 hours of salvage efforts by local tow boats the vessel was subsequently freed and towed to Christiansted Marina.  USCG is conducting a hull survey on 10DEC2009 and USVI DPNR is planning to survey reef damage on 11DEC2009. [SEP] via Google Earth... [SEP] via Google Earth [SEP] via Google Earth [SEP] NOAA Nautical Chart of Christiansted Harbor from ERMA
On November 21, 2009, the wooden fishing vessel, Patricia Jean, ran aground on the south jetty of Harbor of Refuge, Point Judith, RI.   She is carrying 1500 gallons of diesel fuel.  No release has been reported.  USCG has requested NOAA ERD support. [SEP] ESI Map [SEP] The wooden fishing vessel, Patricia Jean, ran aground on the south jetty of Harbor of Refuge, Point Judith, RI. She is carrying 1500 gallons of diesel fuel. No release has been reported. USCG has requested NOAA ERD support. [SEP] ESI Map
At approximately 0900 PST on 20 NOV 2009, USCG MSD Massena, NY contacted ERD requesting trajectory support for a vessel grounded in the St. Lawrence River. The USCG reported that at approximately 0815 local time on 16 NOV 2009 the 739ft self-unloading bulk carrier CSL Assiniboine grounded in the St. Lawrence River between Lake Ontario and Montreal.  The vessel is aground in Canadian waters (approx 300 yds from US waters).  The ship currently has 307 Metric Tons of Heavy Oil and 74 Metric Tons of Diesel on board.  The ship is also carrying a cargo of 400,000 tons of soybeans. There is minor damage reported to the #2 hold that is under control.  There has been no reported release of any product.  The USCG requested trajectory support for a worst-case scenario.  Currently, the USCG reports that the ship is planning on lightering off enough soybeans to refloat the vessel and then transit to dry-dock for further vessel inspection. [SEP] Google Map showing location of grounding. Location is NE of Lake Ontario and SW of Montreal, Canada. [SEP] 4,500 tons of soybean pellets have been lightered and the barge was towed to Prescott, Ontario. The vessel was successfully refloated and towed to a Canadian drydock for investigation and repairs. No product was released into the Seaway, case closed.
On 19 NOV 2009, ERD was contacted by USCG Sector Portland regarding a 34-36 foot fishing vessel Sea Wind.  The vessel was reported grounded in Willapa Bay, WA, just north of Toke Point. It has an estimated 180 gallons of diesel fuel on-board.  There is currently no report of a spill. [SEP] Tidal Information for Toke Pt, WA from 19-21 NOV 2009. [SEP] Large scale map [SEP] Map
A barge carrying hazardous materials broke free from a tug on November 12, 2009 and grounded off Sandbridge, Virgina on November 13, 2009. Captain Mark Ogle with the U.S. Coast Guard says the La Princesa was near Cobbs Island off the Eastern Shore when two cables broke around 11:00 p.m. November 12. By 6:30 a.m. Friday, the vessel grounded about a quarter mile from the Little Island Park Pier. The 570-foot barge carries various chemicals that the Coast Guard considers hazardous material. 84 HAZMAT loads, containing products such as syrup for soft drinks, alcohol, empty cylinders formerly containing water purification chemicals, and chlorine, etc. are on board, according to ship's owner Crowley Puerto Rico Service, Inc. As of November 13, Titan Salvage has been engaged and a salvage master is on site. A naval architect and assistant salvage master are en route and removal plans are being developed. Officials expect improving weather conditions to enhance salvage and removal efforts. The barge left San Juan, Puerto Rico on November 6 and was headed to Pennsauken, New Jersey (in the Philadelphia area). USCG Sector Hampton Roads has requested information on potential human health and environmental impacts if there is a release. [SEP] As of 1300 hours on Saturday, 11/14/09, Capt. Ogle informed me that the barge is stabilzed on the beach after ballast water was successfully released from the barge yesterday. All containers and contents appear to be secure. No releases. VADEQ HAZMAT, Atlantic Strike Team, and Sector Hampton Roads on- scene. Established safety zone around barge. Plan is to attempt to pull barge off beach Sunday afternoon around 1800 hours during high tide. [SEP] USCG Sector Hampton Roads informed SSC that the vessel continues to drift along shore. Plan is to release some amount of ballast water this afternoon so barge sinks to bottom and stays in place to avoid barge from hitting nearby pier. [SEP] VIRGINIA BEACH, Va. ???€? Titan Salvage crews successfully pulled the barge La Princesa off Sandbridge beach at 7:48 a.m. Wednesday. The crews used two tugs pulling together on the bow and stern of the barge at high tide to free it. The barge, which broke free from the tug Sentry Thursday night, grounded on the beach near Little Island Pier Friday morning. Coast Guard, Crowley and Titan Salvage personnel worked together to remove the barge from the beach while ensuring the safety of the public and environment. Coast Guard inspectors and a member of the American Bureau of Shipping will survey the vessel to ensure that it is seaworthy. Once the survey team is satisfied, the tug Sentry will tow the barge to its next port of call in Pennsauken, N.J. [SEP] Photo taken from NOS news story at: http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/news/weeklynews/dec09/noreaster.html [SEP] PORTSMOUTH, Va.???€?The 580-foot barge La Princesa remains aground north of Sandbridge Pier in Virginia Beach. Titan Maritime, LLC, continues preparations for salvaging the vessel and will attempt to begin operations when weather and sea conditions permit. Members of the Coast Guard???€?s Atlantic Strike Team, the Virginia Port Authority???€?s Maritime Incident Response Team, the Virginia Beach Fire Department???€?s Hazardous Materials Team and Crowley Maritime Corporation, the barge???€?s owner and operator, boarded the vessel earlier today to inspect the cargo for leaks and the vessel for structural integrity. As a result of the inspection, the Coast Guard, MIRT, the Virginia Beach HazMat team and Crowley determined that the barge and its cargo currently pose no foreseeable threat to the environment or to the community. Coast Guard personnel remain on-site and will continue to monitor salvage preparations. Tests revealed that no pollutants have been released into the air, and no chemical sheens have been reported on the water. Friday???€?s effort by Crowley to ballast the vessel was effective. The barge moved 7 yards overnight and remains 135 yards north of the pier. The tug and barge were traveling from San Juan, Puerto Rico, to Pennsauken, N.J., when the barge broke loose 50 to 100 miles from shore on Friday morning. [SEP] The 570-foot barge that went aground in the surf off of Virginia Beach is still stuck there. Salvage crews had planned to try to tow the barge with three powerful tugs at high tide Monday evening, but they were only able to get lines up on two of the tugs. Weather permitting, they plan to try to move the barge at high tide Tuesday evening. The barge ran aground during a powerful storm Friday. Spokesman Mark Miller of Crowley Maritime Corp. of Jacksonville, Fla., said the barge was en route from Puerto Rico to a southern New Jersey port when the barge broke from its tow line. While many cargo containers are empty, Miller said medical equipment, tankers of rum and other cargo remain secure onboard. The Coast Guard said the barge has not leaked. [SEP] Stock photo of the barge that is stuck off Sandbridge (VA). [SEP] A barge carrying hazardous materials that broke free from a tug is stuck off Sandbridge. Captain Mark Ogle with the U.S. Coast Guard says the La Princesa was near Cobbs Island off the Eastern Shore when two cables broke around 11:00 p.m. Thursday. By 6:30 a.m. Friday, it was grounded about a quarter from the Little Island Park Pier. The 570-foot barge is carrying various chemicals that the Coast Guard considers hazardous material. 84 HAZMAT loads, containing products such as syrup for soft drinks, alcohol, empty cylinders formerly containing water purification chemicals, and chrlorine, etc. are on board, according to ship's owner Crowley Puero Rico Service, Inc. The company says Titan Salvage has been engaged and a salvage master is on site. A naval architect and assistant salvage master are en route and removal plans are being developed. Officials expect improving weather conditions to enhance salvage and removal efforts. The barge left San Juan, Puerto Rico on November 6 and was headed to Pennsauken, New Jersey (in the Philadelphia area). Ogle says there's "very minimal exposure to the public and no evacuations are necessary." The company says the barge and its cargo are intact and security is being established to prevent entrance to the barge by unauthorized personnel. USCG Sector Hampton Roads has requested information on potential human health and environmental impacts if there is a release. [SEP] Google image of grounding location for barge carrying Hazmat containers. [SEP] USCG Sector Hampton Roads reports that the 571ft barge LA PRINCESA is now floating freely and underway being towed by two tugs on an E/NE heading from its original beached position. It is currently 1000 yds offshore moving slowly to the E/NE. Station Little Creek's RB-M is moving from Sandbridge to Rudy Inlet to embark inspectors for transfer to the barge. Once the inspection is complete, the Salvor/Owner have the large tug standing-off nearby to transfer the tow to continue the transit to Delaware Bay (if cleared). [SEP] AP photo attached. [SEP] The 570-foot barge remains wedged on the beach at Sandbridge. On Sunday, crews attached the first of three tow lines to the barge and plan to try to attach two more today, said Mark Miller, a spokesman for Crowley, the shipping company that owns the vessel. Each line will be attached to a separate tug, Miller said. If all goes according to plan, Titan Salvage could make a first attempt to pull the barge off the beach duirng tonight's high tide. On Sunday, officials with the American Bureau of Shipping, Coast Guard, Crowley and Titan assessed the barge to make sure it is seaworthy, Miller said. Also during the weekend, officials were able to confirm that the massive unmanned barge isn't leaking any hazardous chemicals. A crew from the Coast Guard's Atlantic Strike Team, based at Fort Dix, N.J., arrived Saturday with monitoring equipment to test whether any pollutants on the barge had leaked into the atmosphere. After walking around for about an hour and a half with a gas meter, the crew confirmed that all chemicals were safely contained, said Mike Hvozda, a Coast Guard spokesman. As of Saturday afternoon, the Coast Guard and company officials said they were still reviewing a plan to push the barge back to sea. They do not think that it will move on its own any farther. The trouble began about 2 a.m. Friday off Cobb Island near the Eastern Shore, said Capt. Mark Ogle, commander of the Coast Guard's Sector Hampton Roads. A tugboat was towing La Princesa from San Juan, Puerto Rico, to Pennsauken, N.J., with about 30 types of chemicals on board in large shipping containers. A cable connecting the two vessels snapped, and the 570-foot-long barge began to drift. Fearing a crash at the Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel, the Coast Guard sent another tug to try to corral the barge, but it hit 20-foot seas and had to turn around. La Princesa hit the beach about 6:30 a.m. Friday in Sandbridge. The Coast Guard attempted to slow the barge down by filling its tanks with water. Smith said the extra weight from the tanks kept the barge
Coast Guard MSD Unalaska contacted the NOAA Alaska SSC at 2100 on Oct. 30 to report a capsized vessel, the 59 ft F/V Carley Renee on the east side of Unalaska Island at 53°-54'N, 166°-06'W, Beaver Inlet.  The four POB were rescued by a CG cutter on-scene which is taking them to Unalaska/Dutch Harbor for interrogation.   The vessel has 2000 gal diesel and 20-40 gal of hydralic fluid on board.   No leak had occurred as of the reporting time; however,  the CG cutter also reported that the winds and currents were pushing the vessel towards the rocks. A trajectory and weather information were  requested.   On Saturday, Oct. 31, a CG helo overflight found the vessel grounded on Egg Island, on the west side of Unalaska Island, but still capsized and with a small sheen move westerly from the vessel.   Dan Magone was hired as a salvor to attempt to tow the vessel to a place of refuge for stabilization and fuel removal and ultimately to Dutch Harbor for salvage and repairs.   On Sunday at 1500 while towing the Carley Renee only a few miles west of Egg Island, the vessel suddenly sank supposedly in 125 fathoms of water with no sheen on the water surface. Presumably all the diesel and hyd.fluid were released.    Case closedJohn WhitneyNOAA SSC for Alaska [SEP] The fishing vessel Guardian nearby the capsized fishing vessel Carley Renee after rescuing four fishermen who abandoned ship. Small boat is from the USCG Munro Coast Guard photo by Coast Guard Cutter Munro. [SEP] Spot forecast for F/V Carle Renee 2130 ADT, Oct. 30, 2009 Tonight: Winds from the N at 15 knots Seat 6- 7 feet Saturday: Wind from the N at less than 10 knots Seas 4 - 6 feet. [SEP] USCG initially reported the name of the vessel as the Carle Renee. The correct name of the vessel is the Carley Renee [SEP] Evening report; Oct. 31: Around noon today the CG conducted an overflight to locate the FV Carley Renee and ascertain its status. The vessel was found still capsized and practically ashore on the SW side of Egg Island. A small sheen was noted around the vessel. See attached Power Pt (file and photos credited to Coast Guard). Dan Magone has been hired to attempt to place air pillows under the vessel to keep it afloat as it is towed to a place of refuge for more extensive salvage work and removal of the fuel. Tomorrow, Sunday, the NOAA SSC will be involved in a Unified Command called meeting to discuss possible places of refuge where the vessel might be taken. John Whitney NOAA SSC Anchorage [SEP] NWS Anchorage Marine Forecast for Unalaska Bay Nov. 1, 2009, 0830 LT PKZ171-020300- UNALASKA BAY 400 AM AKST SUN NOV 1 2009 ...SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY MONDAY... .TODAY...VARIABLE WIND LESS THAN 10 KT. SEAS 3 FT. .TONIGHT...VARIABLE WIND LESS THAN 10 KT. SEAS 3 FT. .MON...S WIND 15 KT INCREASING TO 25 KT IN THE AFTERNOON. SEAS 4 FT. GALES (>30 KTS) LATE MON. NIGHT FROM SOUTH SHIFTING TO NW BY TUES MORNING  .TUE...SW WIND 30 KT. SEAS 3 FT. .WED...W WIND 45 KT. SEAS 7 FT. .THU...W WIND 35 KT. SEAS 5 FT. TUES, WED, THU, ARE SOMEWHAT UNCERTAIN OTHER TO PREDICT THAT A BIG WEATHER FRONT WITH HIGH WINDS WILL BE MOVING THROGH THE AREA [SEP] Oct. 30, 2009 Coast Guard coordinates rescue of four fishermen off Juneau fishing vessel JUNEAU ???€? The Coast Guard coordinated a rescue of four Alaska fishermen after receiving a mayday call from a crewmember aboard the Juneau-based fishing vessel Carly Renee reporting they were taking on water and abandoning ship 22 miles east of Unalaska Island at approximately 4:42 p.m Friday. The Coast Guard Cutter Munro heard the mayday call over VHF radio from the Carly Renee and immediately issued an Urgent Marine Information Broadcast while en route to the scene. The fishing vessel Guardian responded within 10 minutes to the UMIB and arrived on scene to safely rescue the four fishermen who were in a life raft. The Munro arrived on scene shortly after and transferred a health services technician to the Guardian by small boat to determine the condition of the four fishermen. The four fishermen were reported in stable condition with no injuries and were transferred to Dutch Harbor by the fishing vessel Guardian. The Carly Renee did not sink. It is capsized and is estimated to have 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel on board. Weather conditions at the time of the incident were 23 mph winds from the east with 1-foot seas. The cause of the incident is under investigation by Marine Safety Detachment Unalaska. [SEP] The UC along with resource agency folks met this morning to discuss a port of refuge where the vessel could be taken for salvage and fuel removal operations. Sicek Cove on the north side of Sedanka Island at the mouth of Beaver Inlet was selected where salvor, Dan Magone, might be able to take the vessel for further stabilization. At 1500 this afternoon with the Carle Renee in tow at 1.6 knts the vessel suddenly sank in 125 fathoms of water. No sheen was observed, and this is too deep for any recovery operations. Incident was closed out. John Whitney, NOAA SSC Anchorage [SEP] The fishing vessel Guardian nearby the capsized fishing vessel Carley Renee photo by Coast Guard Cutter Munro. [SEP] 53?? 54'N by 166?? 06'W [SEP] Anchorage Daily News Article ???€? Oct. 31, 2009 A 59-foot commercial fishing boat that capsized near Unalaska Island is drifting toward the Gulf of Alaska and attempts to salvage it could begin as early as today, the U.S. Coast Guard says. The vessel is co-owned by Gov. Sean Parnell's rural affairs adviser, John Moller. The other owner is Moller's sister Sandra, director of real estate and construction for Cook Inlet Region Inc. It's too early to say why the Carley Renee -- which was fishing for pacific cod -- overturned, Sandra Moller said Saturday. The vessel issued a mayday call at 4:42 p.m. Friday. The crew said the boat was taking on water and they were abandoning ship 22 miles east of Unalaska Island, according to the Coast Guard. The crew of four people, ages 21 to 38, escaped to a life raft before the vessel capsized, the Coast Guard says. A nearby fishing vessel, the Guardian, rescued the fishermen within 20 minutes after the mayday. "There were no serious injuries," said Ensign Allie Ferko. "It was just a couple minutes later when the (Coast Guard Cutter Munro) got on scene.???€? The vessel carried an estimated 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel and 20 gallons of lube oil, Ferko said. A Coast Guard helicopter returned to the scene Saturday to check on the condition of the boat. "It's not endangering any sort of animal population and the currents are taking it out toward the gulf where the minor (oil) sheen they see now will dissipate quickly," Ferko said. A salvage company plans to inspect the boat today, Sandra Moller said. "If they are able to tow it, they'll tow it into, likely, Dutch Harbor." Moller, who was appointed in February by then-Gov. Sarah Palin as a top aide on rural issues, couldn't be reached for comment Saturday.
On October 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a recreational diver came to the surface covered with oil after diving on the British tanker SS Coimbra, which was torpedoed during WWII (located approximately 20 miles south of Shinnecock Inlet, Long Island, NY in about 150 feet of water). Divers have reported sheens coming from the Coimbra for decades, but the article suggests that the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Ed Levine, NOAA SSC for the region, to discuss the situation. It is expected that an interagency conference call will be held this week to determine whether an investigation to evaluate response options, is warranted. At the national level, ERD is developing an interagency agreement with the USCG under which the agencies will work together to address threats from vessels sunken off US shores that contain significant volumes of oil. The recent news article is available at this link: http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment of Tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, CT ???€? The U. S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine to conduct an underwater assessment of the tanker Coimbra, from June 19th ???€? 27th. Located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y., the Coimbra was sunk during World War II by a German U-boat. The operation will assess the condition of the tanker and potential to have an environmental impact. During the assessment, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Sector Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public and protection of the marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For more information regarding the Coimbra operation, please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at 203-468-4433 or by mail at Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] Chart 12300 [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment, possible oil removal operations on Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The operation is scheduled to take place from April 28th to May 30th. The initial evaluation will assess the condition of the tanker and what potential environmental impact still exists. Based on the assessment, possible oil removal operations will take place. During the operation, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, New York Department of Environmental Conservation, Coast Guard District One Response Advisory Team, Navy Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Coast Guard Headquarters Office of Environmental Management, and Coast Guard Salvage Engineering Response Team to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine, and possibly remove any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public and protection of the marine environment.???€? The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. For media interested in the operation, please contact Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy at 212-514-4292, or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? Two oils samples pulled from the wreck of the tanker Coimbra are prepared to be sent out for testing after being retrieved from one of the tanks, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] Photos from U.S. Coast Guard District 1 PADET New York Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) [SEP] Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Sector Long Island Sound Public Affairs Officer Office: (203) 468-4433 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard postpones underwater assessment of tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard postponed an underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra till the spring of 2019. The early start of the 2018 hurricane season and activity of hurricane Chris impacted logistics and raised safety concerns for the operation. ???€?The safety of our personnel is one of our highest concerns in any mission we conduct,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We are scheduled to resume our joint efforts with the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation in the spring of 2019.???€? For more information regarding the underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at (203) 468-4433. -USCG- [SEP] Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A piece of the tanker Coimbra salvaged from 180 feet of water, rests on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon while two crew members label oil samples for testing, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety officer monitors a diver inside one of the two hyperbaric chambers on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon, May 16, 2019. After diving on the tanker Coimbra wreck 180 feet below the surface, they must spend two hours safely decompressing in the hyperbaric chamber. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment
Sector Anchorage notified the Alaskan NOAA SSC that the 42' FV Sea Dancer had grounded at 0400 on Oct. 14, and was taking on water near Sand Point, Alaska, on the south side of the Alaskan peninsula.   The skipper was requesting assistance from Sand Point and related that 150 gal of diesel was on board.   The Coast Guard requested weather information from NOAA.   Later that day, assistance arrived from Sand Point, and the Sea Dancer is now safe and on the blocks for repairs at Sand Point. No oil was released into the water.  Case closed.
On the evening of 06OCT2009, Sector LA/LB notified NOAA ERD of a 32foot squid boat grounded near Smugglers Cove (Santa Cruz Island, CA) that is due for refloating and towing to Ventura Harbor.  The F/V Lady Frances is carrying approximately 200 gallons of diesel fuel on board and shows no sign of pollution.  Sector LA/LB requested information on oil fate and trajectory in the event that a spill occurs during the estimated 12-14hr transit. [SEP] Map with text [SEP] The intended route of the towed F/V Lady Frances is provided on the attached chartlet (from NOAA Chart no. 18022). Route will be from Smuggler's Cove (on the east end of Santa Cruz Island) to Ventura Harbor, CA. [SEP] Map with text
At 0710 hrs (local time) on 1 October 2009, a mystery slick was observed 18 miles S of the Isles Dernieres.  The slick was reported as a 1 x 3 miles “dark oil” orientated from the SE to the NW and moving NW.  USCG MSU Morgan City has requested a trajectory analysis. [SEP] Initial Trajectory Analysis With the approaching cold front, the observed slick is not expected to contact the shoreline over the next 48 hrs. The slick may move as much as 8 to 10 miles to the NW through the day, but the change of wind direction will move the oil back offshore and generally W of the original location. With increasing sea state and choppy conditions, the slick may break up. Since the type of oil is unknown, it is difficult to predict persistence. If a persistent slick would be observed after the front passes through, a new trajectory would be required, but it is possible that no slick will remain. Also, another cold front is expected in the area by Monday which would again push any remnants and fragments back offshore. Fragments of the slick and tarballs may persist, but given the relatively (or potentially) small volume of oil observed, any future shoreline impacts would be highly scatter tarballs potentially unnoticeable or in the same range as background tarball stranding. Trajectory Discussion The current conditions at LUMCON indicate E to S winds at 5 to 8 knots. This is consistent with the Coastal Marine Forecast for SE winds at 5 to 10 knots, but by tonight the winds are expected to be S and then clock around to the NW by Friday morning. The nearshore coastal current is thought to be westerly (moving slowly to the W) but relatively weak. The winds should dominate any on-shore transport in this location. At present, the winds have an on-shore component, but this will change by Friday morning with the approaching cold front. In 24 hrs with 10 knots winds, the slick may move as much as 8 to 10 miles toward shore before the winds reverse pushing any residual oil offshore. If any oil persists through the storm event, it is likely to be scattered fragments of the slick (maybe even scatter tarballs depending on the type of oil). Since we have no information as to the type of the oil, it would be only speculation to look past the next 36 to 48 hours. Note, by Saturday, the winds will have returned to E-SE which would move any remaining oil W and N and toward the shoreline between Fourleague Bay and Marsh Island. That is a distance of 40 miles, so it is unlikely that the volume of oil observed would persist as a slick for that distance and it is likely that the winds will again shift. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] At 0710 hrs (local time) on 1 October 2009, a mystery slick was observed 18 miles S of the Isles Dernieres. The slick was reported as a 1 x 3 miles ???€?dark oil???€? orientated from the SE to the NW and moving NW. USCG MSU Morgan City has requested a trajectory analysis. A report was provided to the USCG. . In short, with two consecutive cold fronts passing through the area over the next 5 days, the reported slick is not expected to persist long enough to make land fall. See Initial Trajectory Analysis for details. Unless the situation changes, this entry will serve as both the Initial and Final Hotline Report. [SEP] Marine Coastal Zone Forecast: Coastal waters from the southwest pass of the Mississippi River to Lower Atchafalaya River LA out 20 NM (GMZ550) Synopsis...RIDGE OF HIGH PRESSURE WILL CONTINUE TO MOVE EAST OF THE COASTAL WATERS TODAY. A COLD FRONT IS EXPECTED TO MOVE INTO THE COASTAL WATERS FRIDAY EVENING AND THEN PUSH SOUTH INTO THE NORTHERN GULF OF MEXICO FRIDAY NIGHT AND REMAIN NEARLY STATIONARY INTO SUNDAY WITH WEAK HIGH PRESSURE BUILDING OVER THE CENTRAL GULF COAST. ANOTHER COLD FRONT WILL BE APPROACHING THE MARINE AREA FROM THE WEST ON MONDAY. Today...Southeast winds 5 to 10 knots. Seas 1 to 3 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Tonight...South winds 10 to 15 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Protected waters choppy. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Friday...Northwest winds 10 to 15 knots. Seas 2 to 4 feet. Protected waters choppy. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Friday Night...Northwest winds near 5 knots becoming north after midnight. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Saturday...East winds 5 to 10 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Saturday Night...Southeast winds 10 to 15 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Protected waters choppy. Scattered showers and thunderstorms.
The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center (NOAA/NWS) issued a Tsunami Watch and Warning message at 0659 Samoa time on September 29, 2009.  The Watch and Warning message was generated because of a Magnitude 8.0 earthquake that occurred in the Samoa Islands Region, 138 miles southwest of Pago Pago, American Samoa at a depth of 20.5 miles (U.S. Geological Survey).The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) reported American Samoa (population 65,000) was struck by a tsunami, causing flooding, damage, and an unknown number of casualties. A Presidential Major Disaster was declared on September 29, 2009 for individual assistance, public assistance, and hazard mitigation. An Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) has departed from Honolulu, Hawaii on a US Coast Guard C-130 to deliver emergency supplies and to return the Governor of American Samoa, who was in Honolulu at the time of the Tsunami. USCG Sector Honolulu has requested assistance from the NOAA SSC to help facilitate obtaining satellite imagery of American Samoa. The NOAA Pacific Tsunami Warning Center and National Weather Service also continue to provide incident support. Updates on conditions and requests for assistance from USCG and others will be posted as they become available. [SEP] fagatele bay NMS [SEP] Marine Debris off Amanave Village in southwestern Tutuila. NOAA Photo [SEP] Finding kids toys on the reef brings home to the team the tragic loss suffered by the coastal communities. [SEP] On December 1, 2009, the NOAA Marine Debris Team met with the Office of Samoan Affairs to brief Village Chiefs and Pulenu'u (Mayors) on planned activities. The meeting ended with a press conference and interview with the Samoan Government Television Station. [SEP] scattered debris off Leone. Teams are seeing patchy but occasionally extensive areas of small debris items, as well as larger household items and sections of tin roofing materials. [SEP] Article about survey efforts from the Samoa News [SEP] Ruth Yender and discussion over site priorities with local agencies [SEP] Corals in Fagatele Bay NMS [SEP] NOAA Photo [SEP] Marine Debris off Amanave Village in southwestern Tutuila. NOAA Photo [SEP] Fagatele Bay NMS [SEP] DMWR SAFE Boat
Grounded tanker.  No leak.  16 million gallons of Venezuelan crude onboard. [SEP] Map [SEP] Tide heights at Venice [SEP] http://www.riverwatch.noaa.gov/forecasts/ORNRVAORN.php Today Dates STG CHG 09/28 09/29 09/30 10/01 10/02 NEW ORLEANS /17/ 4.8 -0.1 4.9 5.4 5.5 5.5 5.9 Thing to note is that the river is expected to rise about a foot over the week at New Orleans. It will rise less down at MM 3 but it will rise. [SEP] http://www.riverwatch.noaa.gov/forecasts/ORNRVAORN.php Today Dates STG CHG 09/28 09/29 09/30 10/01 10/02 NEW ORLEANS /17/ 4.8 -0.1 4.9 5.4 5.5 5.5 5.9 Thing to note is that the river is expected to rise about a foot over the week at New Orleans. It will rise less down at MM 3 but it will rise. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST for Miss R Mile Marker 3 Monday, Sept 28. 0930 CDT Sunrise/Sunset: Sept 28 Sunset: 1849 CDT Sept 29 Sunrise: 0653 Sunset : 1848 Forecast: Winds: Monday: Winds from the W 5 - 10 knots Monday night: Winds from the SW at 5- 10 knots Tuesday: Winds from the N at 15 knots Tuesday night: Winds from the NE at 10 - 15 knots Wednesday: Winds from the NE at 5 knots Wednesday night: Winds from the E at 5 knots Thursday : Winds from the SE at 10 knots Friday: Winds from the S to SW at 10 - 15 knots Precipitation: No rain expected through Wednesday. No thundershowers until Thursday. Expect clear skies though Wednesday and into Thursday. [SEP] At approximately 0700 hrs on Monday, 28 September 2009, USCG Sector New Orleans notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a grounded in-bound vessel in the Mississippi River. The M/T EAGLE TUCSON grounded between MM 3 and 4 at Cubits Gap. The vessel has 16 million gallons of heavy crude oil onboard. No leak reported. Oil type is Morichal from Venezuela with a reported API of 12.0. NOAA has been asked to provide trajectory and water level information. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator is on-scene at Sector New Orleans. The vessel is partially outside of the channel. The bow and stern are free, but the middle starboard portion of the hull is sunk into nearly three feet of mud. At mid-ship, the current water depth on the port side of the vessel is 51 feet and 42 feet on the starboard. The vessel is reported to have a draft of just under 45 feet. A total of six tugs are in route, but the tide is currently dropping. Additional information will follow.
At five minutes after midnight, the morning of 26 September 2009, USCG Sector Houston notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a collision between a ship and a barge on the Houston Ship Channel between the USCG Sector Office and Interstate 610 (NRC Notification #918913).  According to the NRC report, the incident happened at about 2100 hrs local time on 25 September 2009. [SEP] News Release Date: Sept. 26, 2009 Coast Guard, partner agencies respond to oil spill in the Houston Ship Channel HOUSTON ???€? A Unified Command consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard, Texas General Land Office, Port of Houston Authority, the Houston Fire Department and O'Brien's Response Management are responding to an oil spill in the Houston Ship Channel, Saturday. Watchstanders from Sector Houston-Galveston received a call at approximately 9 p.m. Friday, Sept. 25, 2009, reporting that the 458-foot motor vessel Chemical Supplier had collided with Buffalo Barge #251 in the vicinity of Brady's Island near the I-610 bridge. The motor vessel was headed inbound attempting to turn around in the ship channel when it struck the barge resulting in the rupturing of one of the vessel's fuel tanks. The tank vessel Chemical Supplier is reported to have a 2-foot by 4-foot gash in one of its fuel tanks, approximately 5-feet above the water line. Upon colliding with the barge, crewmembers on board the Chemical Supplier began transferring the #6 heavy fuel oil from the ruptured fuel tank to an empty fuel tank on board. The following resources are currently being utilized during the response effort: * 15,100 feet of containment boom (currently deployed) * 11 workboats * 6 roll off boxes (dumpsters) * 6 vacuum tanks * 2 helicopters * 2 frac tanks (large storage tanks) * 2 drum skimmers (used to extract oil from the water) * Clean Channel oil spill recovery barge The following response organizations are working with the Coast Guard in the oil response effort: * T&T Marine Salvage * United States Environmental Services * Clean Channel * Phoenix Environmental * Oil Mop * Garner Environmental The source of the leak was secured at approximately 1:25 a.m. The fuel tank contained an estimated 22,500 gallons of fuel oil. At present, approximately 10,500 gallons of #6 heavy fuel oil has been reported to have spilled into the Houston Ship Channel. "We immediately deployed boom to contain the spill, and boats and skimmers to recover the spilled oil. The Coast Guard is working diligently with its partner agencies to reduce environmental impact, " said Capt. James Whitehead, deputy commander of Sector Houston-Galveston. The Houston Ship Channel has been closed to all vessel traffic north of the I-610 bridge. [SEP] At approximately 9 p.m. last night (Friday, Sept. 25, 2009), the 458-foot motor vessel CHEMICAL SUPPLIER collided with BUFFALO BARGE 251 in the upper Houston ship Channel. The tank vessel CHEMICAL SUPPLIER is reported to have a 2-foot by 4-foot gash in the hull, rupturing one of its fuel tanks approximately 5-feet above the water line. The USCG reports that the fuel tank contained an estimated 22,500 gallons of fuel oil. At present, approximately 10,500 gallons of #6 heavy fuel oil has been reported spilled into the Houston Ship Channel. The majority of the fuel oil is in the vicinity of the ship and under dock 28 where the ship has been moored. The actual location of the incident is unknown. The information provided in the earlier Hotline was based on the initial verbal description only. Approximately 1.5 miles of the ship channel has been closed to all vessel traffic. NOAA has been requested to provide scientific support. LTjg Mary Gill is in route. [SEP] Photo courtesy of: NOAA SSC 27SEP09 Photo of oil under pier where the Chemical Supplier is moored. Flushing operations were being tested today to push the floating oil out from under the pier towards the skimmers. [SEP] Division and Resource Map [SEP] Photo courtesy of NOAA SSC on 27SEP09 [SEP] Photo credit: NOAA [SEP] At five minutes after midnight, the morning of 26 September 2009, USCG Sector Houston notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a collision between a ship and a barge on the Houston Ship Channel between the USCG Sector Office and Interstate 610 (NRC Notification #918913). According to the NRC report, the incident happened at about 2100 hrs local time on 25 September 2009. The details are sketchy at present, but 25,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil are reported in the water. NOAA has been asked to provide a trajectory. [SEP] Photo courtesy of NOAA SSC on 27SEP09 [SEP] http://cgvi.uscg.mil/media/main.php?g2_itemId=670059 [SEP] The SCAT Team conducted their survey today. The highest concentration of oil seems to be under the pier where the Chemical Supplier is moored, City Dock #28. As the tide began to drop, they began using fire hoses to flush the oil from under the dock towards the skimmers. This seemed to be effective and will take place again tomorrow with additional personnel. At approximately 1500, preparations began to take place to move the Chemical Pioneer which was moored at a pier east of the Chemical Supplier. The vessel was cleaned and cleared to leave at around 1800. There have only been two oiled cormorant(sighted but not captured), one dog, and a small snapping turtle reported as oiled wildlife. The dog and turtle have been cleaned by the wildlife team and released. Skimming will continue through the night only at the stern of the Chemical Supplier where it is well lit. The SCAT Team will do a sweep east of the site tomorrow morning, on 28SEP09, to be sure that no oil was released during the Chemical Pioneer's transit on the evening of 27SEP09. Skimming and flushing will continue at the pier tomorrow. [SEP] The final sign-off process has been completed. Any further clean up wanted by the port will be pursued through private legal means. There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow- up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
On September 21, 2009 at approximately 2200 hrs, a 40 ft. sailboat missed the entrance to Little Egg Inlet, NJ, hitting the shoal and capsizing.  The vessel went down in 10-14 ft. of water with approximately 35 gallons of diesel fuel on board.  Passengers were rescued by the USCG.  On Sept. 22 at 1510 local time, the USCG requested fate and trajectory information from NOAA, due to concerns of a nearby wildlife refuge.
On Sunday evening, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator relative to a reported “gas” leak to the atmosphere near the intersection of Bayou Bienvenue and the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet.  The reported location was 30° 00' 04" N Lat. 089° 54' 44" W Long.  This position is 6-8 miles E of New Orleans LA.  The initial reported stated that “bubbles” of hydrogen gas were observed from a suspected pipeline leak by a company “doing work in the area.”  It turned out that the pipeline was carrying a product defined as refinery fuel gas. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] On Sunday evening, 20 September 2009, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator relative to a reported ???€?gas???€? leak to the atmosphere near the intersection of Bayou Bienvenue and the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet (the MRGO or the ???€?Mr. GO???€? as named by locals). The reported location was 30?? 00' 04" N Lat. 089?? 54' 44" W Long. This position is 6-8 miles E of New Orleans LA. The initial reported stated that ???€?bubbles???€? of hydrogen gas were observed from a suspected pipeline leak by a company ???€?doing work in the area.???€? It was unclear if the company had anything to do with the damaged to the pipeline. It turned out that the pipeline was carrying a product defined as refinery fuel gas. The pipeline was reported owned by Air Products Inc. The pipeline was reported as an 8???€? line. The volume of release was unknown. The RP stated the gas was much like natural gas; therefore, the greatest threat would be the potential for fire and explosion. NOAA provided general guidance to the USCG as to potential safety risks especially during the evening hours under stable air conditions. It was assumed from the RPs description that the product was a mixture of very light hydrocarbons such as alkanes and alkenes with a vapor pressure in the same range typical of natural gas. Safety of the public and responders was stressed as well as establishing a safety zone (keep the public away) and air monitoring at the site for responder safety. During the last communications with the USCG Sunday evening, it was stated that the company was shutting in (or had just shut in) the line and planned to have a repair crew assess the line on Monday. It would seem that the situation was relatively stable. In researching refinery fuel gas, it was found that this could be a quite complex mixture of different chemicals from different processes within a refinery. The mixture can also, and often does, contain poisonous substances such as hydrogen and hydrogen sulfide as well as the mixture of light alkanes and alkenes assumed in the discussion above. In summary, the company is responding to the situation, and it was fortunate that there were no injuries from the gas or a fire or explosion. NOAA is only in a standby mode. Unless there is additional information provided by the USCG or a change in the situation, this entry serves as the Initial and Final Hotline report.
Crowley Barge 160-1 ran aground near Quinhagak, AK, just south of the mouth of the Kuskokwim River on Sept. 16, 2009, as the result of navigation error during a normal fuel delivery to the village of Quinhagak.   The barge has 72,000 gallons of gasoline and 72,000 gallons of Jet fuel.  The barge is a 1968 single skin barge.   The grounded barge had gone through two tidal cycles, during which the tug could not pull it off the bottom, prior to notifying CG Sector Anchorage on Sept. 17.    No fuel has been released into the the environment.    The CG requested that the NOAA SSC provide weather and tidal information.     Shortly after the grounding a second barge, the OB-5, was summoned from Bethel 80 miles to the north.   Barge OB-5 was able to liter 60,000 gallons of Jet fuel from barge 160-1 and delivered 55,000 gallons to tanks at Quinhagak.   Upon returning to 160-1, barge OB-5 itself grounded just west of the location of the 160-1.   When OB-5 refloated on a subsequent high tide, it was directed to stand by offshore as it had too much draft to conduct further work in the mouth of the Kanektok River.     Crowley summoned another barge from Nome to complete the litering of the still grounded 160-1.      The combination of a spring tide and a strong westerly wind produced enough water under the barge to refloat it spontaneously very early on Sept. 22.    The barge was towed to the Quinhagak tank farm where it transferred all its remaining cargo with the exception of 5000 gallons of jet fuel.    It subsequently was directed to Bethel where it will be inspected by the Coast Guard.    Thus bringing an end to the incident. [SEP] Photo of grounded barge at Quinhagak [SEP] Zoomed In [SEP] CG C-130 overflight photo of grounded barge [SEP] Yellow line between the barge and the Native Corp Facility is 0.55 statute miles [SEP] Google Earth view of location of Quinhagak [SEP] The Crowley barge 160-1 refloated on the high tide at 0100 LT this morning. Not only was it a spring tide, but strong NW winds offshore pushed additional water into the mouth of the Kanektok River allowing the refloat to occur. Subsequently, the barge traveled to the Quinhagak tank farm and discharged the entirety of its 72,000 gallons of gasoline and 7000 gals of the remaining 12,000 gallons of jet fuel. The barge will now travel to Bethel where the remaining jet fuel will be off-loaded and the CG will inspect the barge. The response stood down at 1000 today, just in time for the 1100 change of command ceremony for Sector Anchorage at which new Captain Fosdick will be replacing interim Capt. John Kenyan. [SEP] A three-man CG team from Sector Anchorage were sent on scene along with three members of the Pacific Strike team which arrived in Anchorage the morning of Sept. 18. Crowley has brought another smaller barge on-scene, the morning of Sept. 18, and is planning on litering fuel into it to hopefully refloat the grounded 160-1 barge. The CG is currently evaluating the Crowley litering plan prior to granting permission to commence that process. The NOAA SSC has kept the CG abreast of weather and tidal conditions at Quinhagak. John Whitney, NOAA SSC, in Anchorage [SEP] More detailed Google Earth view of Crowley barge location at Qinhagak [SEP] Summary of important points from Sun. 10:00, Sept. 20, conference call: 1. Attendees were CG Sector Anchorage personnel both on-scene and in Anchorage, Crowley personel from both Seattle and Anchorage, State of Alaska ADEC, and a local Quinhagak rep. 2. Crowley now has O???€?Brien Response Group involved in helping them run their IMS 3. Warren Jones, local from Quinhagak, attended the conference call and was very useful and knowledgeable in establishing strategies for future barge movement in the channels of the Kanektok River and providing information on local RAR that might need protective booming. 4. Barge 160-1 remains aground, and did not float free on the previous nights high tide, despite the litering of 60,000 gallons of Jet Fuel the previous day. Nevertheless, the situation is stable. 5. Meanwhile, the original litering barge from Bethel, OB5, refloated and was able to depart the mouth of the Kanaktok River and was standing by offshore. 6. ETA for the shallow draft barge coming from Nome is 0600 on Tuesday, Sept. 22, such that additional litering from the 160-1 will not occur until the mid-day high tide on Sept. 22, which is also a spring tide. Hopefully this combination will refloat the 160-1. 7. Crowley is also making plans for protective booming of resources at risk and other human use features that might be threatened should a large release. They will be working with the locals to determine the location of all these resources at risk.
At 2:55 AM (local time) on 12 September (early Saturday morning), the U.S. Coast Guard notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator that an Offshore Supply Vessel (OSV) struck a rig while being untied.  The vessel spun around and allied with the rig spilling an estimated 1,800 gallons of marine diesel fuel into the Gulf of Mexico.  The location was roughly 4 nautical miles SW of Belle Pass Louisiana and just off the barrier islands and Timbalier Bay.  The source is reported secured.  NOAA was requested to provide a trajectory analysis. [SEP] At 2:55 AM (local time) on 12 September (early Saturday morning), the U.S. Coast Guard notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator that an Offshore Supply Vessel (OSV) struck a rig while being untied. The vessel spun around and allied with the rig spilling an estimated 1,800 gallons of marine diesel fuel into the Gulf of Mexico. The location was roughly 4 nautical miles SW of Belle Pass Louisiana and just off the barrier islands and Timbalier Bay. The source is reported secured. NOAA was requested to provide a trajectory analysis. In short, diesel is easily dispersed (naturally dispersed) in rough seas with breaking wave conditions (for the details, see the trajectory provided). Unless the situation changes, this entry will serve as the Initial and Final Report. [SEP] (Report Sent to MSU Morgan City) Situation: OSV struck rig and damaged fuel tank. An estimated 1,800 gallons of marine diesel fuel was reported spilled some 4 nautical miles SW of Belle Pass. The incident was reported to have occurred at 1:20 AM (local time). Trajectory Summary: The spilled diesel fuel is not expected to persist long enough for shoreline impact. The rough sea conditions at the incident location would dissipate the bulk of the surface slick before daylight. Any remnants after 6 to 8 hours would not be expected to present a appreciable on-shore threat. In short, diesel is easily dispersed (naturally dispersed) in rough seas with breaking wave conditions. A more detailed description follows. The Drivers and Fate Discussion: At this location, wind would be expected as the primary driver to surface oil pollution. Currently, the winds are onshore from the ESE at 15 to 20 knots with seas running 3-5 feet (rough sea conditions). Isolated thunderstorms may created still higher gust and localized rougher seas. The weather station at South Timbalier Block 52 was indicating ESE winds at 17 knots at 2:00 AM. The NOAA Marine forecaster stated that winds are expected to slack off to ESE to SE winds at 10-15 by mid-morning with seas dropping to between 2 and 4 feet. Again, localized thunderstorms are still possible. The OCCAM Model suggests very little current flow off East Timbalier. Winds would be expected to move the spilled oil WNW toward Timbalier Bay and the E side of Timbalier Island (the W side of East Timbalier would be within the uncertinity parameters). The closest land contact would probably be in at least 8 hours with predicted winds, but the bulk of the diesel is not expected to persist more than 6 hours. Diesel is a relatively nonpersistent oil. For a small spill under light sea conditions diesel would not be expected to persist as a surface pollution threat for more than a couple of days (or less). With breaking waves and rough seas, this time period would be much reduced. Under the current conditions (rough seas), ADIOS2 predicts that in 3 hours 83% of diesel will have dissipated (17% by evaporation and 66% by natural dispersion). It is likely that the spilled fuel oil will have dissipated as a surface pollution threat by daylight. Surface oil slicks are a threat to any marine or wildlife resources that might contact the slick itself. Few (probably no) birds would be on the surface or feeding with the present sea conditions, but there are marine mammals and sea turtles that might present. The surface slick is not expected to persist but a few hours as breaking waves will transport the bulk of the diesel into the water column. Dispersed oil (naturally dispersed in this situation) would be a short-term threat to aquatic marine resources. Diesel fuel is actually relatively toxic compared to most other fuel oils. There would be injury especially to the smaller marine organisms and juveniles. It is highly unlikely that an observed ???€?fish kill???€? would be observed from this incident, but there would be hidden injuries. For this situation, other than preventing any additional spillage, there are no mitigation options. [SEP] (image credit, google)
At approximately 0930 (local time) on 26 Aug. 2009, a mystery slick was observed by a Coast Guard C-130 in the Gulf of Mexico offshore of the Louisiana Coast. The slick was describes as being 1 mile by 15 miles of dark slick. The position of the center of the slick was reported as 27°08.48N--092°35.18’W. This location is about 160 miles south of the nearest shoreline in Louisiana, and about 80 miles SE of the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary. [SEP] I did up a graphic anyway. Here it is..... I would tend to agree, with the bilge assessment as it seems to start as a linear feature (with a similar line just to the north) This image is from 8/26 at 4:15 UTC (about 12 hours before the initial report) Chris Bushy comment ... they claim it's from a natural seep. I asked how they know and Chris Jackson said they have seen enough of them to get a feel for when it's a natural seep(s) or not ... most of the time. [SEP] The USCG reported that a second overflight this afternoon by a oil company that operates in the area reported that the slick appeared to be breaking up but each spot was a different color & consistency. The observer said some was rainbow, some silvery, and some dark spots, but even the dark spots had different colors/tones to them...maybe more consistent with a bilge pump. The size reported in the second overflight was about 1 mile by 25 feet long, but flying at 500ft it was hard to judge distance. The observer did confirm that is was NOT a solid 15 mile long slick of crude.
On Thursday, August 13, the US Coast Guard Sector San Juan informed us of bulk carrier grounded on Silver Bank, north of the Dominican Republic. They have offered technical assistance, and requested a trajectory analysis. The location was given as 20°31'N--69°39'W, which is about about 50 miles north of the Dominican republic, and about 110 miles to east-southeast of Grand Turk Island. The ship is reported as carrying 73,000 gal of heavy fuel oil, and a cargo of dry fertilizer. There have been no reports of any fuel or cargo released. [SEP] Location Map [SEP] http://cwcaribbean.aoml.noaa.gov/data.html [SEP] Heavy Fuel Oil fact sheet [SEP] TIME: 1800 EDT August 13, 2009 TO: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: M/V Harns For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a potential release from a grounded Bulk Cargo Carrier north of the Dominican republic. The bulk cargo carrier M/V Harns has been reported grounded yesterday on Silver Bank, north of the Dominican Republic. The location was given as 20??31'N--69??39'W, which is about 50 miles north of the Dominican Republic, and about 110 miles to the east-southeast of Grand Turk Island. The ship is reported as carrying 73,000 gal of heavy fuel oil, and a cargo of dry fertilizer. There have been no reports of any fuel or cargo released. We have been asked to provide a trajectory analysis for a potential release. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the SE at 20-25 knots with gusts to 30 knots. Friday: winds are expected to be from the SE at 20-25 knots becoming E-SE at 10-15 in the afternoon hours. Friday night: winds are predicted to be from the E-SE at 10-15 knots. Saturday: winds are forecast to be from the E-NE at 10-15 knots. Saturday night: winds are expected to from the E-NE at 10-15 knots. Precipitation: Tonight: strong showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Friday: isolated showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Friday night: scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Saturday: numerous showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Seas: Tonight: seas are expected to be 8-10 feet. Friday: seas are expected to be 6-8 feet. Saturday: seas are expected to be 3-6 feet. 2) TRAJECTORY: In that region, the currents are primarily to the northwest about 1/4 to 1/2 knot. If oil were released in the next few days, we expect it to move to the northwest, following both the winds and the currents. Any coral heads that reach the surface in the northwest portion of silver bank could potentially be affected. The nearest land in that direction is Grand Turk Island, over 100 miles away. It would take well over five days (the limit of the forecast period) for the oil to travel that far. We expect that any slick will be broken up into scattered, and probably hard to detect, tarballs before reaching that far. If oil were released Saturday, the winds are expected to be weaker, and have more of a northerly component. This would tend to move the oil a bit more to the west northwest, but still in the direction of Grand Turk Island. We do not expect a shoreline contact in the Dominican Republic. If there is a release, we could provide a more detailed assessment based on the details of that release. 3) OIL FATE: Heavy refined products, such as Intermediate Fuel Oils (IFO), Fuel Oil No. 6 and Bunker C, are more persistent than lighter refined products. The refining process has removed the lighter components and left them somewhat pre-weathered. As a result they can present quite persistent floating pollutant problems. These oils do occasionally form an emulsion, but usually only slowly, and after a period of days. These oils do not spread into very thin films and often simply break up into smaller patches and then tarballs. It is also common for these oils to lose enough of their light ends so that they do not rapidly form sheens and the resulting scattered tarball fields are very difficult to observe using visual or remote sensing techniques. This, combined with the persistence of the tarballs, makes these kinds of spills quite likely to result in long range, and occasionally unexpected, beach impacts. Fuel Oil No. 6 has a much lower vapor pressure than diesel and will thus be less volatile. The proportion lost to evaporation will be small as will the amount permanently dispersed into the water column. Fuel Oil No. 6 can emulsify with a typical water content of around 30% but usually does so slowly. More detail about the particular fuel on board would allow us to make a more detailed assessment.
At 0730, 11 AUG 2009, USCG Sector Portland contacted the Northwest SSC regarding a vessel aground off Nye Beach, Newport, OR. This location is approximately 1.8NM N of the Yaquina Bay Jetty. The F/V Little Linda is currently on its side and is reported to be leaking minimal amounts of fuel through its vents.  The vessel is reported to have 2800 gallons of diesel on-board. On-scene observations report no sheen/fuel in the water and very light wind/wave conditions. The USCG requested a trajectory for a potential release of the 2800gallons of diesel onboard. [SEP] Tidal Heights [SEP] Map showing location of F/V Little Linda aground. [SEP] F/V LITTLE LINDA AGROUND, NEWPORT, OR 0930 PDT, Tuesday August 11, 2009 Sunset (8/11): 2027 Sunrise (8/12): 0616 Sunset (8/12): 2026 _____________________________________ Forecast: Today: winds are forecast to be from the S at 5-10 knots. Tonight: winds are expected to be from the S at 10-12 knots. Wednesday: winds are predicted to be from the S at 10-15 knots. Wednesday afternoon: winds are forecast to be from the S at 5-10 knots. Wednesday night: winds are expected to from the NW at 5-10 knots. Thursday: winds are forecast to be from the NW at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds are predicted to be from the NW at 5-10 knots. Friday: winds are forecast to be from the NW at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: chance of light showers or drizzle in the region. Tonight: chance of light showers or drizzle in the region. Wednesday: chance of light showers or drizzle in the region. Thursday: no precipitation is expected in the region. Friday: no precipitation is expected in the region. Seas: Today: seas are expected to be 3-4 feet with a WNW swell. Tonight: seas are expected to be 3-4 feet with a WNW swell. Wednesday: seas are expected to be 3-4 feet with a WNW swell. Thursday: seas are expected to be 3-4 feet with a WNW swell. Friday: seas are expected to be 3-4 feet with a WNW swell. Temperature: Highs are expected to be in the mid 60???€?s and the low in the mid 50???€?s. [SEP] Map showing location of F/V Little Linda aground.
On Tuesday evening, 4 Aug. 2009, MSU Galveston reported that a barge carrying 25,000 bbls of diesel fuel allied with a mooring buoy in the ICW near the junction with the Colorado River.  The bow rake, and two void tanks are damaged.  The initial reports suggest that there was no damage to the cargo tanks. The barge operator is Maryland Marine.  The USCG is responding to the incident and requested a potential trajectory and RAR should there be a release. [SEP] On Tuesday evening, 4 Aug. 2009, MSU Galveston reported that a barge carrying 25,000 bbls of diesel fuel allied with a mooring buoy in the ICW near the junction with the Colorado River. The bow rake, and two void tanks are damaged. The initial reports suggest that there was no damage to the cargo tanks. The barge operator is Maryland Marine. The USCG is responding to the incident and requested a potential trajectory and RAR should there be a release. The NOAA ERD Home Team is generating the final trajectory analysis. A very brief Resources at Risk analysis follows. Should there be any indication of an oil spill or an increased risk of a spill, this analysis will be expanded. The most sensitive resource from an RAR prospective would be the mouth of the Colorado River. It is highly sensitive, but if the locks are closed during a spill, that would prevent direct impact. Preliminary Resources at Risk Assessment Should oil enter the Colorado River, it would threaten a highly sensitive coastal estuary at the mouth of the river. The estuary that encompasses this area is valued for high productive fish and invertebrate nursery grounds. The area generally includes a high number of feeding wildlife and birds. Oysters are present in this area. While the entire estuary would be considered highly sensitive, the group of islands called Dog Island Reef is a very important rookery. Protected species in this area include Brown Pelicans (Federally Threatened ???€? Texas Endangered), Reddish Egret (Texas Threaten), and Peregrine Flacons (Texas Threatened). The area describes is simply the entrance to an even larger estuary, Matagorda Bay. Management of the locks would significantly reduce the risk to the sensitive area identified above. The lock operator well knows this based on the discussion with the home team oceanographers. [SEP] Small Diesel Spills Fact Sheet [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] BARGE, MATAGORDA, TX 1745 CDT, Tuesday August 04, 2009 Sunset (8/04): 2012 Sunrise (8/05): 0644 Sunset (8/05): 2011 _____________________________________ Forecast: Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the SSE at 5-10 knots. Wednesday: winds are forecast to be from the SSE at 5-10 knots. Wednesday night: winds are expected to from the SSE at 5-10 knots. Thursday: winds are predicted to be from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds are predicted to be from the S at 5-10 knots. Friday: winds are predicted to light and variable becoming from the SSE at 10-15 knots late in the morning. Precipitation: Tonight: isolated showers are expected in the region. Wednesday: no precipitation is expected in the region. Thursday: no precipitation is expected in the region. Friday: no precipitation is expected in the region. Seas: Tonight: seas are expected to be 1 foot or less. Wednesday: seas are expected to 1 foot or less. Thursday: seas are expected to be 1 foot or less. Friday: seas are expected to be 1 foot or less. Temperature: Highs are expected to be in the low 90???€?s and the low around 80. [SEP] USCG MSU Galveston reports that they have received and gotten SERT approval on the Lightering Plan to begin at 0700 today. NOAA remains on standby monitoring the situation. If the lightering goes well, this incident will be concluded without a pollution event. This entry will serve as the Final Report unless this situation on-scene changes. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Maryland Marine Barge Allision, ICW at Colorado River, TX  I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 5 August 2009 at 0900 EDT. A Maryland Marine barge carrying 25,000 bbls of diesel is reported to have allied with a mooring buoy in the ICW near the junction with the Colorado River. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers the ICW near the junction with the Colorado River and up to approximately 6 miles east of the source on the ICW. In addition, it covers the Colorado River south of the potential release site and the ICW south to Tiger Island. Consult other ResponseLink reports for oil trajectory information. III. Expected Behavior of Spilled Diesel Fuel ???€? Diesel fuels are light, refined petroleum products with a relatively narrow boiling range, meaning that, when spilled on water, most of the oil will evaporate or naturally disperse quickly (usually within a few days). ???€? When spilled on water, diesel spreads very quickly to a thin film. Thus, on- water recovery efforts are most effective where the oil is trapped against the shoreline or in booms. ???€? Diesel has a very low viscosity and is readily dispersed into the water column when winds reach 5-7 knots or sea conditions are 2-4 foot waves, which is unlikely under the currently predicted conditions. ???€? Diesel oils are not very sticky or viscous, compared to black oils. When the oil strands on the shoreline, it tends to penetrate porous sediments quickly, but also to be washed off quickly by waves. Thus, shoreline cleanup is often not needed for small accumulations. ???€? In terms of toxicity to water-column organisms, diesel fuels are considered to be the most acutely toxic oil types, partly because of their tendency to naturally disperse in the water column, but also because of the relatively high low molecular weight PAHs which are more water-soluble and acutely toxic. Thus, there could be acutely toxic concentrations in the shallow water in tidal channels or over tidal flats where the diesel accumulates against the shoreline. ???€? Diesel spills can affect vegetation if the oil strands or pools on the sediments around the vegetation, where it can penetrate into burrows and root cavities and affect the roots. Yellowing of vegetation thus affected can occur within a few days to a week. ???€? Diesel spills can affect waterfowl and marine birds by direct contact. Mortality is caused by ingestion during preening as well as to drowning and hypothermia from matted feathers. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk Shoreline types along the ICW are primarily salt and brackish marshes, swamps, scarps and steep slopes in clay, sheltered scarps, exposed and sheltered riprip, and exposed and sheltered manmade structures. The shoreline along the Colorado River is primarily salt and brackish marsh with scarps and steep slopes in clay.  V. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Listed species potentially occurring at the mouth of the Colorado River/Dog Island Reef include: wintering piping plover (federally/state threatened), brown pelican (state/federally endangered, breeding), peregrine falcon (state endangered), and reddish egret (state threatened, breeding). Other Birds The Mouth of the Colorado River/Dog Island Reef area is important for several species of birds, including: wading birds, such as black-necked stilt (nesting), black-crowned night-heron, great blue heron, great egret, snowy egret, tricolored heron (nesting), white ibis, mottled duck (nesting), clapper rail (nesting), shorebirds, least tern (nesting), osprey, terns, pintails (arriving in August), magnificent frigatebird (juveniles), American oystercatcher (breeding), laughing gull (nesting), roseate spoonbill (nesting), royal tern (nesting), sandwich tern (nesting), and black-bellied plover. Migratory songbirds may be present along the ICW. Low numbers of shorebirds, wading birds, osprey, and other species may be using the Colorado River. Wading birds, mottled duck, clapper rails, and peregrine falcons are present in Saint Mary???€?s Bayou and Egret Island. Birds present in Little Boggy Creek marsh/McNab Lake, north of the ICW include: wading birds, willet (breeding), shorebirds, olivaceous cormorant, cattle egret, and great egret. Fish and Inverts Fish present in the Colorado River, a nursery area, include spot, blue catfish, gars, Atlantic croaker, red drum (spawning), and spotted seatrout (all life stages). The Mouth of the Colorado River is an important nursery area for species such as gars, gulf menhaden, bull shark, black drum, blue crab, American oyster, brown shrimp, and white shrimp. Reptiles Texas diamondback terrapin are present at the Mouth of the Colorado River. There may be alligators nesting in McNab Lake. VI. Human-Use Resources There are 4 boat ramps and 2 marinas along the ICW in the potentially affected area. [SEP] Note, the reported position based on the coordinates provided is wrong. The actual position is reported before (east of) the locks on the ICW (image credit, google).
At the request of the USCG, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator investigated the potential oil spill trajectory for two grounded barges near Texas City Light #14  The barges CTCO 336 and 358 are each loaded with a reported 20K gallons of a light crude oil and were being pushed by the tug HENRI CENAC. [SEP] (see attached) [SEP] At the request of the USCG, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator investigated the potential oil spill trajectory for two grounded barges near Texas City Light #14 The barges CTCO 336 and 358 are each loaded with a reported 20K gallons of a light crude oil and were being pushed by the tug HENRI CENAC. It would appear from the information provided that the barges have grounded S of the Texas City Dike. High tide was at 5:56 AM (local time), and low tide is predicted for 9:09 PM this evening. Winds are predicted to be S at 15 to 20 kts. The winds at Station GPST2, Galveston Pleasure Pier, have been around 15 kts S-SSW over the last hour. In the absence of a tidal influence, any spilled oil transport would be wind dominated pushing the oil into the Texas City Dike. Any breaks in the dike would allow oil movement into Lower Galveston Bay. Should a spill occur during the ebb tide cycle late afternoon and early evening, oil could migrate toward the pass between Galveston Island and Bolivar Peninsula due to the effect of tidal currents. The extent of movement and the treat to sensitive areas on the western portion of Bolivar Peninsula would be driven in part by the timing of any release. Should there be an indication of actual oil in the water, this initial trajectory forecast would need to be updated immediately to provide an accurate prediction. Tide predictions and a brief weather summary follow. I will work up the RAR shortly. If you have any questions or if there is an observation of a spill, please contact me immediately. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (206) 849-9928, cell  Tides: 1 Aug. 2009. High Tide, 5:56 AM (+1.5 feet); Low Tide, 9:09 PM (-0.3 feet). 2 Aug, 2009. High Tide, 6:34 AM (+1.4 feet); Low Tide, 9:49 PM (-0.3 feet). Note, the tide predictions at the Galveston Pleasure Pier have been running consistent with the water level observations for the last several days with respect to both predicted times and tidal heights. The same is expected to be true for the Texas City Dike area. Brief Weather Forecast: Today (1 Aug. 2009): A 20 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms. Partly cloudy, with a high near 94. Heat index values as high as 107. South wind around 15 mph, with gusts as high as 20 mph. Tonight: Partly cloudy, with a low around 81. South wind between 10 and 15 mph, with gusts as high as 20 mph. Sunday (2 Aug. 2009): A 20 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms. Partly cloudy, with a high near 93. Heat index values as high as 105. South wind between 10 and 15 mph, with gusts as high as 20 mph. Sunday Night: Partly cloudy, with a low around 81. South wind between 10 and 15 mph, with gusts as high as 20 mph. [SEP] (see attached) [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] (image credit, google)
On Sunday afternoon, 26 July 2009, NOAA was notified of an oil spill 33 miles offshore and 60 miles southwest of Houma, LA that occurred on Saturday afternoon. The leak was from the Eugene Island Pipeline System and approximately 63,000 gallons of oil was released.  Pre-approved dispersant was applied to the heaviest concentrations of the spill. On water recovery was also initiated. NOAA is providing on-going trajectory and weather support. [SEP] EUGENE ISLAND PIPELINE SPILL, GOM, LA 1230 CDT, Monday July 27, 2009 Sunset (7/27): 1959 Sunrise (7/28): 0620 Sunset (7/28): 1958 _____________________________________ Forecast: Today: S-SE winds are expected at 5-10 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the S at 5-10 knots. Tuesday: winds are forecast to be S at 5-10 knots. Tuesday night: winds are forecast to be from the S-SE at 5-10 knots. Wednesday: winds are forecast to be SE at 10-15 knots. Thursday: winds are predicted to be from the SE 10-15 knots. Precipitation: Today: chance of showers and thunderstorms is expected for the region. Tonight: showers and thunderstorms is expected for the region. Tuesday: : chance of showers and thunderstorms is expected for the region. Tuesday night: : showers and thunderstorms is expected for the region. Wednesday: chance of showers and thunderstorms is expected for the region. Thursday: : chance of showers and thunderstorms is expected for the region. Seas: Today: seas are expected to be 1-2 feet Tonight: seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. Tuesday: seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. Tuesday night: seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. Wednesday: seas are expected to be 2 feet. Thursday: seas are expected to be 2-3 feet. [SEP] Photos taken by LDEQ during a fixed wing overflight at 1300 hrs on 30 July 2009. Photographs of the reported "fingers of oil" and tiger stripes. [SEP] Brief Update, 28 July 2009 After the morning overflight, a 9 mile by 1 slick was observed further NE of the position yesterday. The slick is composed of 6 streamers of heavier oil, rainbow sheen, silver sheen that thins into no observable sheen. This slick is believed to be the remnants of the original release on Saturday evening. The leading edge is still within the preapproval zone, and dispersants were applied while redirecting the MSRC GULF RESPONDER to encounter any remaining slick. The monitoring team reported that the application appeared to have some effect and requested a second sortie on the leading edge. A second sortie is in route and addition skimming vessels have been mobilized and are in route to intersect. Additional information to follow. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] Based on the latest overflight update, it would seem that the response phase of the Eugene Island Pipeline Oil Spill has ended. I have attached a few additional pictures since the RP asked that we not use any of their photographs pending internal approval. There will be an after-action briefing with the RP (Shell), the USCG, State of Louisiana representatives on Wednesday. The NOAA team as well as other federal partners will also be in attendance. A final report will be generated after that meeting as well as an after-action dispersant report to RRT6. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] Story ran 7/28/09 NEW ORLEANS (AP) - The Coast Guard says the sheen from a 58,800-gallon weekend oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is now covering an area of 80 square miles. That's up from Monday's figure of 28 square miles. A Coast Guard spokesman said Tuesday that cleanup workers have recovered 1,000 gallons from the spill. He recommended that boaters avoid the area, about 65 miles south of Houma near Atchafalaya Bay, to not hamper cleanup efforts or navigate through contaminated water. The Coast Guard said a Shell pipeline released the oil Saturday for reasons that are still under investigation. [SEP] USCG Press Release 31 July 2009 [SEP] An overflight arrived over the source @0800 this morning. The source sheen has not changed. It is a cone less than 1 mile in length with 200 yards of rainbow sheen from the source and the remaining being silver sheen. The cone is approximately 300 ft wide at the widest point. The head of the main sheen is now greatly reduced and broken up into three smaller sheens. The sheen nearest to shore is in position 28??58'00"N, 089??34'35"W. This location is approximately 8nm from the head of Southwest Pass (the mouth of the Mississippi River). The leading sheen has some rainbow color on the far eastern end but is mostly silver sheen. The remaining two patches are silver sheen. All three patches are within a 2-3 mile square area. Winds this morning were 10 knots and seas 2-3 feet. All skimming attempts have been called off. The diving boat and observation boat are still on scene at the source as they continue with the repair process. Another overflight is scheduled for tomorrow to reassess the situation. Conference calls will continue with the UC to remain on track with the IAP. [SEP] SPRAY REPORT 29 JULY 2009 SORTIE 4 Dynamic Aviation Group King Air 98Y LOG FILE SUMMARY Date: 07/29/09 Time: 11:44:20.39 Pilot "V KANE"; Aircraft "N7198Y"; Job "20" Log interval = 1.0 seconds; Min log speed = 44.7 MPH Swath width = 75.0 feet; SV Mask = 5 GMT offset = 5 hours FLOW CONTROL SETUP RECORD Date: 07/29/09 Time: 11:44:20.39 Total Volume = 299.00 Gallons Application Rate = 5.0000 Gallons/Acre Valve_cal = 13 Meter_cal = 16.40 SPRAY ACTIVITY Spray Ave Ave Ave Pass Start End Dist Acres Gal Gal Gal Spd Hdg # Time Time Ft /Min /Sw /Ac MPH Deg  1 12:34:08 12:34:15 1578.9 2.72 122.41 13.77 5.07 159.31 230 2 12:37:53 12:37:58 1157.2 1.99 123.97 10.04 5.04 162.32 228 3 12:41:26 12:41:32 1442.0 2.48 123.49 12.72 5.12 157.93 229 4 12:45:36 12:46:11 8115.3 13.97 122.54 71.03 5.08 159.11 236 5 12:50:12 12:50:33 4870.6 8.39 122.94 43.11 5.14 157.79 232 6 12:50:46 12:51:02 3809.9 6.56 122.57 33.12 5.05 161.02 241 7 12:54:04 12:54:46 9700.4 16.70 116.25 81.03 4.85 158.19 237 LOG SUMMARY Log Start Time: 07-29-09 11:44:20.39 Log End Time: 07-29-09 13:08:30.44 Total Distance traveled: 237.86 mi Distance sprayed: 6.31 mi Area sprayed: 57.32 acres Amount sprayed: 285.00 gallons Average Application Rate: 4.97 gallons/acre Average Speed while spraying: 158.78 MPH Average Spray Rate: 119.58 gallons/minute [SEP] Photo of the LOUISIANA RESPONDER skimming oil on 28 July 2009 (USFWS). [SEP] 7/28 overflight [SEP] Map [SEP] A photo provided by the SMART monitoring team. While this portion of the pass missed much of the slick, where there was contact, there was dispersion as indicated by the brown plume (date unk, USCG). Note, all of the SMART photos and the written observations will be passed to the NOAA SSC for documentation and reporting to the RRT. The two pictures shown were sent only as examples for posting (I just wish that they had also sent the date). Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator
On Wednesday, 10 July 2009, at 1530 hrs, the NRC received a report of a “mystery sheen” in Green Canyon Block 645 (report number 912389).  USCG Marine Safety Unit Morgan City followed up on the report and asked NOAA to provide a trajectory analysis. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] On Wednesday, 10 July 2009, at 1530 hrs, the NRC received a report of a ???€?mystery sheen???€? in Green Canyon Block 645 (report number 912389). USCG Marine Safety Unit Morgan City followed up on the report and asked NOAA to provide a trajectory analysis. The mystery slick is reported to be 3.5 by 2 miles in size. Note, the information available is based on observations from personnel at the BP platform who state that the slick is at their location, but not associated with their operation. The person making the report also stated to the USCG that there is a natural seep in the area, but it is unknown if this slick and the seep are connected. The reported location at 1530 hrs was 27?? 19???€? 16???€? N Lat. 90?? 32???€? 8???€? W Long. This position is more than 100 miles off the Louisiana coast in the Gulf of Mexico. Preliminary Trajectory Analysis Given the light winds and sea state, the reported slick is not expected to move very fast. It may slowly drift to the NE over the next 12-36 hrs. The slick is reported to be composed of rainbow sheen. The volume is unknown, but if 100% cover???€? the slick may be in the 1500 gallon range (or much less if the color is light rainbow and patchy). Given that the type of oil is an unknown, the actual volume unknown, and the winds and sea state are light it is very difficult to provide an estimate as to how long the slick might persist before dissipating with any accuracy. That stated, the slick is not expected to persist more than a couple of days. The slick would not be a threat to the shoreline or nearshore resources at this distance offshore. Offshore birds feeding in the area of the slick could be at risk until the slick dissipates. Weather and Current Information The on-scene observations at the time of the report were W winds at 4 knots. The current marine forecast for this area suggest that winds are light and variable, maybe 5 to 10 knots and seas 1 to 2 feet. The Shell Brutus platform is currently reports winds of 4 to 6 knots. Currents at Green Canyon 858 are very light at less than 0.01 knots to the E. In short, there are no strong drivers at present to move the quickly or in a predictable direction. The current winds are thought to have a net SW component this evening. The NOAA Marine Forecast prediction for this general area for Thursday through the weekend are SE to S winds at 5 to 10 knots maybe increasing 10 to 15 knots this weekend. Seas may strengthen to 2 to 3 feet this weekend. Note, the weather could change and change quickly, but there just isn???€?t much happening at present that far offshore.
NOAA was notified by the Texas General Land Office (TGLO) of tarballs showing up on South Padre Island beaches.  According to TGLO, the oil began washing ashore around daybreak this morning (July 22).  NOAA support has not yet been requested by the USCG. [SEP] LATEST OVERFLIGHT INFORMATION REVEALED HEAVIEST IMPACT ON BOCA CHICA BEACH NEAR THE JETTIES. ONLY SPORADIC COVERAGE WAS OBSERVED IN SOUTH PADRE ISLAND IN A SMALL AREA BEHIND THE HOTELS. OFFSHORE SOUTH PADRE ISLAND 2-10 MILES REVEALED NO FREE FLOATING PRODUCT. SOUTH PADRE ISLAND PUBLIC WORKS IS RAKING THE 1-2% COVERAGE ON THEIR BEACHES. OIL SPILL CLEANUP CONTRACTORS ARE SHIFTING ALL OF THEIR EFFORT TO BOCA CHICA BEACH. CLEAN UP CREWS ARE WORKING ON THE RACK LINE, WHICH IS CONTAMINATED WITH OIL, AT DOLPHINS COVE. USCG AND TGLO PERSONNEL ARE MONITORING ALL CLEAN UP DIVISIONS AT THIS TIME. USCG STRIKE TEAM SHOULD ARRIVE TO ASSIST MONITORING ACTIVITIES. THE ABOVE INFORMATION WAS PROVIDED PRIMARILY BY TGLO [SEP] Photograph provided by TGLO. Photo shows stranded oil on Boco Chico beach. [SEP] The following information was provided by TGLO: Flight took the path from the Fish Pass Jetties on Mustang Island south to the Rio Grande River. We flew down just offshore then came back to the beach just south of the Port Mansfield Jetties to the Rio Grande. We then made three transects running along the beach at 2.5 miles, 5 miles, and 10 miles out from the Rio Grande to just south of the Port Mansfield Jetties. The beaches north of Pass Santiago appeared to be free of oil patches visible from the air. One clean-up crew was visible working north of the pass, and a GLO vehicle was seen patrolling the area. South of the jetties and just at the jetties intersection to land was still heavily oiled. 30-40% right at the jetties diminishing as one flew south away for the jetties to a coverage of 1-10% for the next couple of miles then very sparse thereafter. A clean-up crew was seen working in this area with GLO personnel. We conducted the transects offshore and did not see any signs of floating oil. There were wind rows of the collected golden brown material but upon close inspection the material appeared to be biological algae (Sargassum sp) and sea grass. This material was broken into small rows but did not have a sheen associated with it. 1055 Arrived at Cameron County Airport to refuel 1240 Took off from Cameron County Airport We flew the beach back the entire trip. No oil was visible near the Port Mansfield Jetties or northward. 1325 Arrived back at USCG Sector Corpus Christi Bruce Simons Texas General Land Office [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] At this point, the impacts on Matagorda Island (the farthest upcoast point of impact for this event) have been confirmed by patrols to be minimal with coverages less than 1%. The Aransas Wildlife Refuge will have their turtle patrols over the weekend and will notify the GLO if any more oil starts to come in. From Buzz Martin (7/31/09) [SEP] These 6 photos were provided by TGLO but do not have specific information. They do provide a first look at the type of oiling being reported. [SEP] These 6 photos were provided by TGLO but do not have specific information. They do provide a first look at the type of oiling being reported. [SEP] NOAA was notified by the Texas General Land Office (TGLO) of tarballs showing up on South Padre Island beaches. According to TGLO, the oil began washing ashore around daybreak this morning. It's fresh, heavy product ... very aromatic. Dime to ???€?softball???€? size patties that sheen and adhere to the sand. Coverage is highly variable (reported as trace up to 40% with banding on the beach from 0.5' to 2.5'). No estimate on quantity. No known source. The first impacts were thought to be around the mouth of the Rio Grande and now extend to the north end of the South Padre Island city limits ... a distance of around 9 miles. The USCG was to have conducted an overflight today, but the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator has received no reports as of yet from the USCG. There are two NRC reports (912366 and 912356) thought to be associated with this event, but each identify only an unknown source. I???€?ve sent a message to the USCG inquiring, but have yet to get an update. I understand from TGLO that the cleanup has been federalized. More to follow I???€?m sure, and I???€?ll actively pursue this in an attempt to better assess the true impact (and need for ERD response). Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator Also, Buzz Martin, the State Scientific Support Coordinator reports that as of July 19, there have been 9 Kemp's Ridley (endangered species) nests found on Boca Chica Beach this nesting season. This is the area between the mouth of the Rio Grande River to the south and Brazos Santiago Pass to the north. A reported 33 nests have been found on South Padre Island this season. [SEP] Aug 24, 2009. Talked to Buzz Martin today and he says the tarballs up by Matagorda Island did NOT match the oil that was reported further south. Different oil, different source. [SEP] From Buzz Martin [SEP] Photograph provided by TGLO. Photo shows the S Jetty on the Boco Chico Side. [SEP] To Charlie Henry August 18. 2009 How far up the coast do we expect tarballs this summer the originate from Mexico or Southern Texas? Tarballs may impact as far north as Galveston Island with an outside chance of reaching Bolivar Peninsula into September. Data: TABS buoy: The daily overview from today indicates a strong south to north current off Brownsville, a persistent East to West Current off Lake Sabine. Buoy B just south of Freeport is weak and variable with a slight downcoast (NE to SW bias). The record over the past few days from the buoys reflect this pattern. This would make it difficult for tarballs to move north of the Freeport area. SST (Sea Surface Temp) Analysis: This shows a strong upwelling signal to about 28 degrees north. This indicates at south to north current along the coast from about 20 degrees north in Mexico to about Matagorda Island. SSH (Sea Surface Height) Analysis of surface currents: This shows a south to north coastal current extending to about Matagorda Island to the north. Stat wind table from buoy 42035 off Galveston: The wind stats indicate persistent winds from 110 to 220 degrees in August. This is from the SE, S, and SW directions. In Sept the winds begin to shift and become 020 to 190. This is from the NE, E, SE, and S. We expect the northward migration of tarballs to stop in September if the statistical winds hold true to form. IXTOC oil spill: During the summer of 1979 oil extended as far north as Galveston Island from the IXTOC oil well blowout. Discussion: Historically tarballs from Mexico have gone as far as Galveston Island. Data from various sources listed above indicate that this will probably be the case again this summer. The most likely northern most extent from looking at currents appear to be in the Matagorda Island. However winds could carry some tarballs as far north as Galveston Island and under just the right conditions, some oil could be carried as far as Bolivar Peninsula. Note that any oil spilled between in the coastal zone south of Matagorda Island could end up on the beach along the South Texas coast. The oil does not have to originate in Mexico.
On 7/21/09 USCG Sector North Carolina notified the NOAA SSC about a vessel sinking offshore of Diamond Shoals, Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. The F/V TINA RAY, a 76 foot long wooden vessel carrying approximately 1600 gallons of #2 diesel fuel collided with the R/V LOCURA, a  33 foot sailboat.  Fuel on-board sailboat is unknown.  Location was approximately 10nmi offshore.  USCG reported a sheen about one mile long by 1/2 mile wide. USCG requested verbal trajectory.  Based on NE currents (1-2 knots) and SW winds (5-7 knots) the sheen was moving in a NE direction away from shore.  Based on 80 degree water temps and 90 degrees air temps, SSC expected sheen to dissipate within 12-24 hours depending upon rate of discharge of diesel fuel from fuel tanks. Sailboat involved in incident was secured and towed to shore.  A vessel is enroute to salvage the F/V TINA RAY which sank.
The 72 foot Motor Yacht Shogun grounded in Biscayne National Park 7/14/09 and was refloated without a pollution incident the same day.  NOAA was notified as a trustee. [SEP] Motor Yacht Shogun Grounding Biscayne National Park Miami, FL 7/15/09 Initial & Final The 72 foot motor Yacht Shogun grounded in Biscayne National Park on July 14, 2009 at position 25-31.1N and 080-10.5W. The vessel carried 1900 gallons of diesel fuel. The vessel was successfully refloated at high tide without incident. USCG Sector Miami informed the SSC that the company towboat conducted the salvage and sent divers down to assess the condition of the boat. They stated that no coral damage was reported. FLDEP and the NPS were engaged and will contact NOAA if coral damage is discovered at the grounding site. SSC B Benggio
On June 16, 2009, NOAA ERD was notified of a stranded sailing yacht on Rose Atoll in American Samoa.   The 35-foot aluminum vessel is believed to have approximately 40 gallons of diesel onboard, but reports are very sketchy at this time.  The yacht is reported to be intact and not leaking.  A private yacht is enroute to provide assistance.  Rose Atoll is located approximately 130 nautical miles east-southeast of Pago Pago Harbor, American Samoa, and is the easternmost Samoan island. It is the southernmost unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System. On January 6, 2009, Rose Atoll Marine National Monument was established, which includes Rose Atoll National Wildlife Refuge within its boundaries. [SEP] Additional information is at: http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/news/features/0209_rose.html http://www.fws.gov/roseatollmarinemonument/ On January 6, 2009, President George W. Bush established Rose Atoll Marine National Monument under the authority of the Antiquities Act of 1906. The monument incorporates approximately 13,451 square miles within its boundaries, which extend 50 nautical miles from the mean low water line of Rose Atoll Presidential Proclamation 8337, which established the monument, gave the Secretary of the Interior management responsibility for the monument, including Rose Atoll National Wildlife Refuge, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce. It prohibits commercial fishing within the monument, but gives the Secretary of Commerce, through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, primary responsibility for managing fishery-related activities. The proclamation further provides that the Secretary of Commerce initiate the process to add the marine areas of the monument to the Fagatele Bay National Marine Sanctuary. On January 16, 2009, the Secretary of the Interior delegated his management responsibilities for the monument to the Fish and Wildlife Service through Secretary???€?s Order 3284. FWS is working with NOAA and the Government of American Samoa to carry out the requirements of the Presidential Proclamation and Secretary???€?s Order. [SEP] Rose Atoll Map [SEP] TRANSMISSION: ALERT DATE AND TIME (UTC) 172025 JUNE 2009 FROM: Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand  TO: HQJFNZ Watch Keeper RAN MSA CMDR Powell US Fish and Wildlife  INFO: MRCC Gris-Nez JRCC Honolulu MNZ Media RCCNZ Managers ------------------------------------------------------------------------- SAR SITREP (NUMBER) Four (A) IDENTITY OF CASUALTY: SY PAUL ERIC (B) POSITION: 172015UTC June 14 32.133S 168 09.060W (C) SITUATION: SV PAUL ERIC aground on Rose Atoll position 14 32.133S 168 09.060W. Person on board is not injured and has not declared a Distress.  76 ft private vessel MV SPIRIT OF ULYSSES has agreed to respond to PAUL ERIC. ETA 172300UTC (171200 Samoan time). Crew will assess situation on arrival and assist if possible. (D) NUMBER OF PERSON: 1 Dominique Clerc (F) CO-ORDINATING RCC: Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (G) DESCRIPTION OF CASUALTY: 35 ft 10 tonne aluminium hull swing keel yacht. (H) WEATHER ON SCENE: Sea calm. Wind SSE 8 - 10 kts (M) FUTURE PLANS: Attempts are continuing to ready another vessel in Samoa as back up if SPIRIT OF ULYSSES is unable to render assistance. Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (RCCNZ) DDI +64 4 577 8030 Facsimile +64 4 577 8038 Email rccnz@maritimenz.govt.nz [SEP] Large scale map [SEP] The timing of the tide at Rose will be close(within a few minutes) of Tau Island. The trend will also be the same. The actual heights may be a a little different. Thing to note is that spring tide is coming. Tidal Heights at Tau Island, Manua Islands, SAMOA AND AMERICAN SAMOA Station No. 2855 Latitude: 14?? 13.00' S Longitude: 169?? 32.00' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:04 Low Water -00:34 High water height difference: (*1.0+0.80) Low water height difference: (*1.0+-0.30) Based on APIA (calculated from constituent data) From Fri Jun 12, 2009 to Tue Jun 23, 2009 (12 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Tue Jun 23, 2009; 07:07 AM; 4.3ft Lowest Tide - Tue Jun 23, 2009; 01:16 PM; -0.8ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 06/12/2009 03:19 +0.4 Low Fri 09:47 +3.4 High 16:02 +0.1 Low 22:26 +3.1 High ------------------------------------------------------- 06/13/2009 04:09 +0.4 Low Sat 10:35 +3.3 High 16:47 +0.2 Low 23:16 +3.1 High ------------------------------------------------------- 06/14/2009 05:05 +0.4 Low Sun 11:26 +3.2 High 17:35 +0.2 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 06/15/2009 00:07 +3.2 High Mon 06:05 +0.4 Low 12:22 +3.1 High 18:26 +0.2 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 06/16/2009 01:01 +3.3 High Tue 07:06 +0.3 Low 13:20 +3.1 High 19:18 +0.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 06/17/2009 01:55 +3.4 High Wed 08:03 +0.1 Low 14:18 +3.2 High 20:10 +0.0 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 06/18/2009 02:48 +3.7 High Thu 08:58 -0.1 Low 15:15 +3.3 High 21:01 -0.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 06/19/2009 03:40 +3.9 High Fri 09:51 -0.3 Low 16:10 +3.4 High 21:53 -0.3 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 06/20/2009 04:32 +4.1 High Sat 10:42 -0.5 Low 17:03 +3.5 High 22:44 -0.4 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 06/21/2009 05:24 +4.2 High Sun 11:33 -0.7 Low 17:56 +3.6 High 23:36 -0.5 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 06/22/2009 06:15 +4.3 High Mon 12:24 -0.8 Low 18:48 +3.7 High ------------------------------------------------------- 06/23/2009 00:29 -0.5 Low Tue 07:07 +4.3 High 13:16 -0.8 Low 19:41 +3.7 High [SEP] The Sailing Vessel Paul Eric has been freed from the reef at Rose Atoll and is currently en route to Samoa. TRANSMISSION: ALERT DATE AND TIME (UTC) 230530 JUNE 2009 FROM: Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand  TO: HQJFNZ Watch Keeper RAN MSA CMDR Powell US Fish and Wildlife  INFO: MRCC Gris-Nez JRCC Honolulu MNZ Media RCCNZ Managers ------------------------------------------------------------------------- SAR SITREP (NUMBER) SEVEN and FINAL (A) IDENTITY OF CASUALTY: SY PAUL ERIC (B) POSITION: 14 32.133S 168 09.060W (C) SITUATION: SY PAUL ERIC has been assisted by the MV SILI and is now free from its grounding on Rose Atoll. Mr Clerc is in good spirits and is now making 3.5 kts making for SAMOA.  (D) NUMBER OF PERSON: 1 Dominique Clerc (F) CO-ORDINATING RCC: Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (G) DESCRIPTION OF CASUALTY: 35 ft 10 tonne aluminium hull swing keel yacht. (H) WEATHER ON SCENE: (M) FUTURE PLANS: Incident is now closed. [SEP] From: rccnz@maritimenz.govt.nz [mailto:rccnz@maritimenz.govt.nz] Sent: Wednesday, June 17, 2009 10:24 AM To: Anthony; CMDR Tony Powell; HQJFNZ WK; don_palawski@fws.gov; Luna, Troy LT Cc: CROSS Gris-Nez; JRCCHonolulu; Media; Nigel Clifford; John Seward; Rodney Bracefield; Crecy, Stacey LT Subject: RCC0417/09 SY PAUL ERIC SAR SITREP 04 TRANSMISSION: ALERT DATE AND TIME (UTC) 172025 JUNE 2009 FROM: Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand TO: HQJFNZ Watch Keeper RAN MSA CMDR Powell US Fish and Wildlife INFO: MRCC Gris-Nez JRCC Honolulu MNZ Media RCCNZ Managers ------------------------------------------------------------------------- SAR SITREP (NUMBER) Four (A) IDENTITY OF CASUALTY: SY PAUL ERIC (B) POSITION: 172015UTC June 14 32.133S 168 09.060W (C) SITUATION: SV PAUL ERIC aground on Rose Atoll position 14 32.133S 168 09.060W. Person on board is not injured and has not declared a Distress. 76 ft private vessel MV SPIRIT OF ULYSSES has agreed to respond to PAUL ERIC. ETA 172300UTC (171200 Samoan time). Crew will assess situation on arrival and assist if possible. (D) NUMBER OF PERSON: 1 Dominique Clerc (F) CO-ORDINATING RCC: Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand (G) DESCRIPTION OF CASUALTY: 35 ft 10 tonne aluminium hull swing keel yacht. (H) WEATHER ON SCENE: Sea calm. Wind SSE 8 - 10 kts (M) FUTURE PLANS: Attempts are continuing to ready another vessel in Samoa as back up if SPIRIT OF ULYSSES is unable to render assistance. [SEP] Information relayed from USCG and Maritime NZ The Sailing Yacht "PAUL ERIC" remains hard aground on Rose Atoll. A passing yacht, the SPIRIT OF ULYSSES, arrived on-scene yesterday but could not get within 1/2 mile of the grounded vessel and has departed for Apia. The owner of the PAUL ERIC remains on his vessel. [SEP] The M/V Sili departed Pago Pago Harbor on 20 June at 7:00am Samoa time enroute to Rose Atoll with intermediate stops at the Manua Islands to disembark 30 passengers and cargo. Moon Divers, Inc. crew and salvage equipment are on-board along with FWS National Wildlife Refuge representative, Jim Maragos, to assess the situation at Rose Atoll upon arrival, render appropriate aid, and extract the SY Paul Eric from the reef. [SEP] Rose Atoll Fact Sheet [SEP] NWS Forecast for Rose Atoll June 16, 2009. 1900 HST 48 Hr Forecast: Winds Tuesday night: From the E at 10 knots Wednesday: From the E at 10 knots Wednesday night: From the ENE at 10 knots Thursday: Light and variable, primarily from the ENE to ESE Thursday night: S to SE at 5 knots Friday: SE at 10 knots Friday night : E at 10 knots Seas: 8 feet decreasing to 5 feet on Thursday and Friday Extended Forecast No severe weather in the extended forecast
On the morning of June 6, 2009, NOAA ERD was contacted by MSU Morgan City regarding a sheen offshore of Louisiana from an unknown source.  The sheen was reported as approximately 10 miles by 4 miles.  The reported position is approximately 65 nm from the nearest shoreline. [SEP] Map [SEP] Date: June 6, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry / USCG P.O. Musall FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery sheen off Achafalaya Bay FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: At 0603 CDT a 10 mile by 4 mile sheen was report about 65 nm from shore. It's position is at 28?? 12' 3"N by 91?? 39' 23" W. No reported source. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Saturday: Winds from E at 5 - 10 knots becoming S this afternoon Saturday night: Wind from SW at 5 knots Sunday: Winds from S at 5 - 10 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis No landfall expected from the reported oil. With the oil being so far offshore, landfall would take 1 - 2 weeks and we do not expect a 10 mile sheen to persist long enough to result in any noticeable landfall. With anticipated light winds, the sheen could persist into Sunday and the early part of next week. We would expect a sheen oriented to the N to NE in the downwind direction with no significant onshore movement. If the slick should grow significantly in size over the next day or two, this forecast should be revised and updated by calling the regional SSC, Charlie Henry.
The Alaska SSC was notified early Wednesday morning that the 262 foot Barge SCT282 came into hard contact with the 113 foot Tug Pacific challenger, owned and operated by K-Sea Transportation.  This collision cracked the #1 cargo tank causing an approximate 4-6 inch X 3/16 inch crack two to three feet above the water line and releasing unleaded gasoline into Cook Inlet, approximately 1 mile SSE of the KPL dock at Nikiski.  The barge had a total of around 70,000 BBL of unleaded gas that it was delivering to several south-central ports.   The crack is very close to the top of the tank and was seeping gasoline into the water.  There no injuries to report.  The vessels were expected to arrive in Homer on Wednesday night, May 27th, where actual measurements will determine the size of the spill. [SEP] John was called at about 0600 PDT by CG and he consulted with Bushy by phone. About 30K gallons of gasoline was lost into the water. The concern wasn't the pollution threat but whether folks were gonna get sick from the fumes. School kids were gonna be out later in the morning catching buses near the site. John and Bushy (me) concluded that in a few hours the entire slick would be gone. Remember it was about 0500 ADT when John called. We also noted that with the 4 - 5 knot max currents (spill happened at min before flood) the gasoline was going to move out of the area quickly and exposure times to the fumes would be short. John called CG back and verbally gave them the message. [SEP] Crash spills gas: Boats collide in Cook Inlet By Joseph Robertia | Peninsula Clarion An early morning marine collision in Cook Inlet that resulted in an unknown amount of unleaded gasoline leaking into the water sent personal from the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation and the U.S. Coast Guard scrambling. "I got a call from the duty officer at 3 a.m.," said Gary Folley of ADEC, in regard to the incident, which took place at roughly 1 a.m. Wednesday, approximately 1 mile from the Tesoro KPL dock in Nikiski. The 113-foot Pacific Challenger tug and the 262-foot, 48,000 barrel barge SCT 282 -- both owned by New Jersey-based K-Sea Transportation -- crashed into each other as a result of choppy seas. "It occurred while the barge was leaving the KPL dock," Folley said. The crew began inspecting the vessels, which was when a crack in the tank -- carrying roughly 70,000 gallons of gasoline -- was noticed. "The crack was about 4- to 6-inches long, and just above the water line," Folley said. Within 20 minutes, the crew transferred the gasoline into undamaged tanks on the barge, and a temporary epoxy patch was applied over the pierced area. A Coast Guard flight over the spill area late Wednesday morning did not detect any signs of a sheen or gasoline in the water. "They couldn't see any signs of the spill. Gasoline evaporates pretty fast, but also there probably wasn't much spilled," Folley said. The tug and the barge headed to Homer, where they were scheduled to undergo a detailed accident investigation by the Coast Guard and the state. Measurements also will be taken to determine the amount of gas that did spill. Joseph Robertia can be reached at joseph.robertia@peninsulaclarion.com.
On 12 May 2009, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a crude oil spill in Venice, Louisiana.  The USCG reported that 20 bbls of oil was lost into an adjacent marsh from a pipe failure during a pressure test.  The oil is contained in a small pond and fringe marsh area immediately adjacent to the facility.  The USCG requested that we assess the potential use of in-situ burning to mitigate the spill. [SEP] On 12 May 2009, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a crude oil spill in Venice, Louisiana (NRC Report 905256). The USCG reported that 20 bbls of oil was lost into an adjacent marsh from a pipe failure during a pressure test. The oil is contained in a small pond and fringe marsh area immediately adjacent to the facility. The USCG requested that we assess the potential use of in-situ burning to mitigate the spill. Based on the follow up discussion, it was the consensus of the Federal On-Scene Coordinator???€?s Representative (FOSCR) and the SSC that a conventional response would probably be the best course of action. The incident was adjacent to the small town of Venice and immediately adjacent to infrastructure at the facility. The volume of oil was small and recoverable to expected cleanup standards using drum skimmers and some flushing. In-situ burning is a viable for many marsh spills, but the benefit gained must be weighted with the potential losses. In this situation, the close proximity of members of the general public (smoke plume concern) as well as potential for collateral burn in excess of the area threatened by the spill tipped the scale against the use of in-situ burning and toward a conventional response.
At approxiamtely 0900 local time, the USCG Sector NOLA contacted the SSC regarding a well blowout in Turtle Bay, LA.  The USCG has sent out an overflight and USCG Sector Houma is responding on scene.  The well is reported shut in, but "some oil" was released.  Current amount and type of oil is unknown at this time.  The USCG has not requested any products from NOAA until more information is known. [SEP] Repairs have been made by the RP and the USCG Sector NOLA has scheduled a site visit for Wednesday, May 6th to verify repairs have been made and oil has been cleaned up. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Map [SEP] Photo courtesy of the USCG [SEP] The well has been shut-in, but is sheening lightly. From the overflight observations, we have determined that there is a 1.5 mile X 1 mile of unrecoverable sheen within the impacted area. Be advised that the production from the well flows to the north half tank battery and that according to the company, the well produces 34 barrels of oil a day. Oil Mop is on scene as the OSRO. O'Briens is the Spill Management Team. The well has been boomed off with 100 ft of boom. Additionally, Harvey Cut is also protected with containment boom. USCG Sector New Orleans is also advising mariners to safely transit the area due to the damaged wellhead and oil spill clean-up operations. We are awaiting a well-head repair plan from the company. Our team (USCG)will report on scene with the company tomorrow morning to assess the situation.
A small plane crash-landed near the mouth of the Columbia River in the vicinity of Pier 17, Astoria, OR late in the day on 24APR2009.  No pollution has been observed thus far, but the aircraft was reported to be carrying approximately 240 gallons of Jet-A fuel on board.  USCG Sector Portland requested a trajectory estimate in the event of a fuel release.  News reports indicate that attempts are being made to recover the aircraft from the water. [SEP] Date: April 23, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential 240 gallon Jet A spill in Lower Columbia River FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: An experimental aircraft with 240 gallons of jet A crash-landed in the Columbia River near Astoria, OR at 46?? 11.4'N by 123?? 49.4'W. This near the Columbia River Maritime Museum. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Tonight winds are expected to be 5-10 knots from NE Saturday winds are expected to be 5 - 15 knots from the WNW Saturday night winds are expected to be 5 - 15 knots from the WNW. 2) Trajectory Analysis A spill of 240 gallons of Jet A tonight under NE wind conditions will result in a light sheen that will spread along the Astoria (south bank of the river). During the evening flood the sheen would extend about 1/2 mile upriver (to the E), and during the early morning ebb the sheen would extend about 1 to 1.5 miles to the west. We do not expect the sheen to persist for more than 12 hours (one ebb and one flood cycle) A spill of 240 gallons of Jet A tomorrow under WNW wind conditions will result in a light sheen that will spread along the Astoria (south bank of the river). During the morning flood the sheen would extend about 1 mile upriver (to the E), and during the ebb the sheen would extend about 1 miles to the west. We do not expect the sheen to persist for more than 6 hours (one ebb or one flood cycle) 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model for Jet A fuel. Under 5 knot winds less than 10% fuel remaining after 12 hours Under 10 knot winds less than 10% fuel remaining after 6 hours Under 15 knots winds less than 10% fuel remaining after 3 hours [SEP] The red "X" on the attached NOAA Chart (No. 18003) marks the reported location of the small airplane crash site as relayed by the Sector Portland personnel. [SEP] Photo of the plane floating downriver. Photo from the Daily Astorian website [SEP] Removal operations occured one day after the plane crash-landed. Photo of the plane de-watering during the removal operations. Photo from the Daily Astorian website. [SEP] Photo of plane shortly after crash-landing in the Columbia River. Photo is from the KVAL website.
At approximately 7:30 PM on 22 April 2009, USCG Sector NOLA contacted the SSC requesting a trajectory in regards to a 4" leaking flowline in West Delta 28.  There is currently a 5 mile by 1.5 mile light brown sheen extending to the NE from 29°8.033'N 089°43.2'W at the point where it is bubbling.  There are two possible RP's being contacted to attempt to shut down the line.  An overflight is attempting to get more information before dark. [SEP] Date: April 22, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Mary Barber FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Pipeline leak 60 nm off Timbalier Bay FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: 4" leaking flowline in West Delta 28. There is currently a 5 mile by 1.5 mile light brown sheen extending to the NE from 29??8.033'N 089??43.2'W If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Tonight : SSW winds at 10 - 15 knots with 2 foot seas. Thursday AM: S winds at 10 knots with 2 foot seas. Thursday : SE winds at 10 - 15 knots with 2 foot seas. 2) Trajectory Analysis No shoreline impacts expected. We do not expect a 5 mile by 1.5 mile brown sheen to persist long enough to impact shoreline from over 60 nm from shore. Sea surface analysis of currents indicate that the surface currents in the vicinity of the spill are weak and we expect the 10 - 15 knot winds to dominate the movement of the oil. Therefore we would expect the sheen to be oriented to the N to NW tomorrow. If the leak rate is constant the length of the sheen should remain about 5 miles. [SEP] Map of Flowline Leak location [SEP] http://www.aoml.noaa.gov/phod/dataphod/work/trinanes/INTERFACE/index.html [SEP] After a repeated overflight, the barely discernable sheen turned out to be approximately 5 miles by 150 feet on 23 April 2009. The source turned out to be a 26" natural gas line that was put out of service about 3 months ago. Apparently the line still has some pressure and built up residual. The line ties into the Venice, LA gathering station which is owned by Targa Resources and operated by Chevron. Some time today Chevron will be sending down divers to assess and hopefully secure the source. There have been no further requests from the USCG. [SEP] Photo courtesy of the USCG [SEP] The USCG conducted an overflight this morning. No photos or update has been provided yet. The responsible party has not yet been identified. The USCG thinks this may be a natural gas line. No additional assistance has been requested at this time. Further updates to follow. [SEP] We had the latitude off by 1 whole degree!
The NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Sector Southern New England (SSNE) at approximately 1800 on 18 April, 2009 concerning the grounded 77 foot fishing vessel Cowboy. The vessel is hard aground on a hard bottom. Salvage operations are commencing with an attempt to de-water the vessel. The USCG has requested NOAA support for a "worst case" trajectory. That would be losing the entire contents of the fuel tanks [8,000 gallons of diesel oil] during a maximum flood or ebb tide. [SEP] map [SEP] Date: April 18,2009 To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine / USCG Robert Griffin FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Diesel slick off potential off Nashawena I, Vineyard Sound FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 321-1178. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A 77' F/V has grounded in Vineyard Sound off the SE end of Nashawena I. The position is 41d 25.9m N by 070d 50.7m W. It has 8000 gallons of diesel fuel onboard. It is not leaking at the present time and it is being worked on. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Tonight SE winds at 5 - 10 knots with 2-3 foot seas Sunday NE winds at 10 - 15 knots with 2 - 4 foot seas 2) Trajectory Analysis Should 8,000 gallons of diesel fuel spill tonight or tomorrow there are 4 possible scenarios. Tonight under SE winds and flood tide: Under this scenario oil would impact the East end of Nashawena I. within 2 hours and a sheen would extend into Buzzard's Bay to the WNW for about 2 - 3 miles. Tonight under SE winds and ebb tide: Under this scenario oil would impact the South side of Nashawena I. on the Ebb tide and a sheen would extend along the south side of the the Island for about 1 - 2 miles. Tomorrow under NE winds and flood tide: Under this scenario oil would impact the East end of Nashawena I. and about 1/2 mile of the NE side of the Island. A sheen would extend along the N end of the Island for about 1 - 2 miles Tomorrow under NE winds and ebb tide: Under this scenario oil would impact the SE tip of Nashawena I and a sheen would extend into Vineyard Sound for about 2 - 3 miles. Any shoreline impacts would be like a bathtub ring stain along the beach. 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model. Under 10 knot wind conditions 90% of the diesel would be evaporated or dispersed into the water column within 15 hours. [SEP] GoogleEarth location pic [SEP] The F/V Cowboy was successfully salvaged with no pollution release and brought to a shipyard to be dry- docked and repaired. [SEP] Tide Cur
The wooden-hulled F/V Dandy Bill was reported to have lost propulsion and drifted into the San Mateo Bridge in Southern San Francisco Bay in the evenining hours of 14APR2009 in 35-40knot winds.  The vessel was believed to be carrying up to 4,000 gallons of diesel fuel and began to submerge before fuel could be removed.  Sector San Francisco contacted the NOAA SSC early the next morning, reported that the vessel was expected to break up soon and requested trajectory support. [SEP] Tidal currents at the San Mateo Bridge 15-16APR2009 [SEP] Date: April 15,2009 To: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential diesel spill from F/V at San Mateo Bridge FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The F/V Dandy is reported pinned against the San Mateo Bridge with 4000 gallons of diesel fuel onboard. Reported location is 37d 35.958' N by 122d 12.830'W. It is expected to break apart and release it's fuel. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Wednesday AM : NW winds 10 - 15 knots Wednesday : WNW winds 10 - 20 knots with gust to 25 knots Wednesday evening: Variable winds at less than 5 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis If 4000 gallons of diesel oil spilled this morning on the flood tide before 0530 PDT: The strong NW winds would dominate movement of the oil and result in a sheen that could extend almost the Dunbarton Bridge by 0600. Then on subsequent flood and the WNW winds today, some sheen could persist long enough to impact the East side of the Bay north of the Dunbarton Bridge. If 4000 gallons of diesel oil spilled this morning on the ebb tide starting at 0530 to 1257 PDT: With the WNW winds we would expect a sheen to extend to the East shoreline of the Bay off Hayward and within 3 nm of the East end of San Mateo bridge. The exact location of the sheen impact would depend upon when the spill occurred during the tide phase. Note that if the diesel spilled over a few hours we would not expect the sheen to persist long enough to impact shoreline. Any shoreline impacts would be in the form of a light bathtub ring type stain. 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model. Within 6 hours of the spill 90% of the oil will be evaporated or dispersed. Within 12 hours 99% of the spill will be evaporated or dispersed [SEP] The red "X" on the attached NOAA Chart (No. 18680) marks the reported location of the F/V Dandy Bill as relayed by the Sector San Francisco Command Center.
At 1130local, April 1, 2009, as a result of a collision while docking, roughly 2300gal (estimate as of noon, 2Apr09)) of waste oil (slops) was discharged from a barge owned by Diversified Environmental Services, Inc., into McKay Bay, a secondary bay of Tampa Bay, FL.  Location of the spill was at the "Shrimp Docks" on the southwest side of the 22nd St. Causeway.  The majority of the spill was apparently contained in the immediate vicinity of the dockside facility by the responsible party, since they are also an oil spill cleanup contractor whose HQ is at the dock where the oil was discharged.  The collision opened a 2 foot long gash in the port forward quarter of the barge, puncturing one of the barges tanks.  It is a single skin barge.  NOAA ERD was apparently not notified, and the SSC learned of it through ARD personnel at 1850 local, 1Apr09, although the earliest reports indicated the spill was less than 1000 gallons and contained.  A site visit on 2Apr09 by the SSCr in St. Petersburg collected further information. [SEP] DES barge with 2 foot long gash on port side. Photo by NOAA (Jeansonne)2Apr09. [SEP] Cleanup operations 2Apr09 at dockside facility. Note mangroves in background that were lightly oiled. Photo by NOAA (Jeansonne) 2Apr09. [SEP] CLeanup workers near mangrove area that was lightly oiled (oil did not penetrate substrate.) Photo by NOAA (Jeansonne) 2Apr09. [SEP] As of Tuesday, April 7th cleanup crews were still cleaning the seawalls and pilings in the dock area where the spill occured. USCG and FDEP-BER continue to oversee these operations. The estimated volume spilled is remains very uncertain, but has been reported variously between 1000 and 2300 gallons. Although the NOAA SSCr in the Tampa Bay area coordinated briefly with USCG and FDEP-BER, NOAA scientific support was not actually requested and none is expected regarding this incident. This report is a final for this hotline, unless further significant information becomes available at a later time.
On Saturday, 28 March 2009, the Regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was contacted by USCG Sector New Orleans relative to a 200 yard long mystery slick reported as black oil.  The observation was in the Mississippi River at MM 112.  The USCG requested trajectory support. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] On Saturday, 28 March 2009, the Regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was contacted by USCG Sector New Orleans relative to a 200-yard long mystery slick reported as black oil. The observation was in the Mississippi River at MM 112 at 1:10 PM. The USCG requested trajectory support. The SSC looked at the trajectory implications based on location, river flow, and wind conditions and provided a verbal report to the USCG. In short, the river was relatively high and flowing maybe 4 knots (educated guess only) and the winds were predicted to continue out of the W at 10 to 15 mph. At the time of the request for support, the New Orleans Airport was showing 17 mph W winds. The reported location was favoring the Left Descending Bank (LDB). It was most likely that the oil would strand along the LDB entrained in batture or staged barges fleeting areas. If any oil made it past the first bend of the river, it would likely strand on the RDB near Ama. It would be highly unlikely for the oil to travel as far as Harahan (and if it made it that far, it would have already reached that location when the SSC was notified). This volume of oil was not thought to be very large, and biggest concern might be oiling of barges in fleeting areas. The battures are of environmental concern, but, again, the volume is small. The USCG reported that initial reports from some of the fleeting area reported no oil. No additional support was requested.
The USS New Orleans, a US Navy amphibious ship, collided with the USS Hartford, a US Navy submarine in the Strait of Hormuz on Friday morning at about 0100 local time.  The collision resulted in an estimated release of 25,000 gallons of marine diesel oil.US Navy Supervisor of Salvage contacted the NOAA SSC as per a joint contingency plan and modeling estimates are being prepared. [SEP] MANAMA, Bahrain (AP) ???€? Two U.S. Navy vessels ???€? a nuclear-powered submarine and an amphibious ship ???€? collided during the early morning hours Friday in the Strait of Hormuz between Iran and the Arabian peninsula, the U.S. Navy's 5th Fleet reported. There was no damage to the sub's nuclear propulsion system, said Lt. Nate Christensen, a 5th Fleet spokesman. The military said in a statement that the incident occurred around 1:00 a.m. local time on Friday (5 p.m. ET, Thursday), when the USS Hartford, a submarine, and the USS New Orleans, an amphibious ship, collided. According to the Bahrain-based 5th Fleet, 15 sailors aboard the Hartford were slightly injured but able to return to duty. No injuries were reported aboard the New Orleans. Both ships were heading to port and were going in the same direction when the incident occurred in the narrow strait, said 5th Fleet spokesman, Lt. Nate Christensen. He said the incident occurred at night and the submarine was submerged at the time but that he could give no further details as the collision is still under investigation. FIND MORE STORIES IN: California | Connecticut | San Diego | Iran | Navy | Fleet | Strait of Hormuz | Arabian | Groton | Bahrain-based | USS New Orleans Both vessels are now heading to port for repairs and evaluation, but Christensen said that following standard security procedures he could not say where the vessels were headed. The New Orleans suffered a ruptured fuel tank, resulting in an oil spill of approximately 25,000 gallons of diesel fuel. Both ships are currently operating under their own power. The Navy said both ships were on regularly scheduled deployments to the region and conducting security operations. Oil prices rose after news of the collision which happened in a busy shipping route. As much as 17 million barrels of oil a day went through the narrow strait in the first half of 2008, or about 40% of all seaborne traded oil or 20% of all oil traded globally. The Hartford is based in Groton, Conn., and the New Orleans is based in San Diego, Calif., the Navy said. As are all U.S. submarines, the Hartford is nuclear powered. The New Orleans is an amphibious transport dock ship. ---Source: USA Today online [SEP] Date: FRIDAY, 20 MARCH, 2009 To: NOAA SSC STEVE LEHMANN FROM: NOAA/ORR, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Diesel spill in the Straits of Hormuz FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Bill Lehr ORR, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: At approximately 0100 local time, there was a ship collision resulting in the release of about 25000 gal of marine diesel fuel oil spilled intothe Straits of Hormuz. The reported location is 26 31.06 N-- 56 09.05 E. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast NOT YET AVAILABLE 2) Trajectory Analysis Based upon statistical model runs for simulated spills in the region and the results of the Mt. Mitchel oceanographic survey, Hormuz is an area of current shear with inflow into the Persian Gulf on the Iranian side and outflow on the Arabian side. Winds tend to be channeled by the mountains on either side. Neither winds or currents are at present exceptionally strong at the spill site. The slick will most likely drift slowly toward Larak Island although we would not expect any impact on the island. Other sheens may be visible in the region since this is a common location for tank washing by inbound tankers. 3) Oil Fate NOAA's Adios2 model predicts that 80% of the oil will be evaporated or dispersed within about 24 hours. There may be some photo-oxidation of the oil, causing small residual tar balls. We would expect a possible localized fish kill in the immediate waters of the spill site. [SEP] The USS New Orleans, a US Navy amphibious ship, collided with the USS Hartford, a US Navy submarine in the Strait of Hormuz on Friday morning at about 0100 local time. The collision resulted in an estimated release of 25,000 gallons of marine diesel oil. US Navy Supervisor of Salvage contacted the NOAA SSC as per a joint contingency plan and modeling estimates are being prepared. There is no plans for deployment at this time.
On 19 March 2008, NOAA was notified of a 4-mile long slick in the Gulf of Mexico off Grand Isle LA.  The source of the release is unknown.  USCG requested a trajectory analysis, and such was provided by the Emergency Response Division’s Home Team in Seattle WA. [SEP] TIME: Thurs, March 19, 2009 1300 CDT TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery Sheen: Grand Isle Block 43 For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of sheen reported in Grand Isle Block 43. At about 0900 CDT, there was a report of a 1mi X 4mi silver sheen in Grand Isle Block 43. The sheen was reported to be west northwest of the platform from which is was spotted, which is located at 29??00'03"N--089??51'32"W, which is about 15 miles off shore, south southwest of Grand Isle, LA. There is also an NRC report for a 200ft X 1 mile sheen in West Delta Block 69, which shares a boundary with Grand Isle block 43. The two reported sheens may possibly be from the same source. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today: Winds from the NE at 10-15 knots. Tonight: Winds from the NE at 5-10 knots. Friday: Winds from the NE at 15-20 knots. Friday night: Winds from the NE at 10-15 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: We do not expect the slick to contact shoreline. We expect the movement of the slick to be dominated by the winds. The northeast winds today will move the slick to the southwest, away from shore. The winds are expect to persist from the northeast through Friday night, continuing to move the slick off shore. 3) OIL FATE: Without knowing the quantity or type oil, we can not give an accurate assessment of the oil fate. However, the fairly strong winds today and stronger winds tomorrow will serve to break up the visible sheen fairly rapidly. The smaller sheen reported in West Delta Block 69 is expected to break up very rapidly.
On the morning of March 12, NOAA SSC, Charlie Henry, was notified concerning a UTV that hit a submerged object inside of Galveston Bay and was taking on water. The vessel was not leaking oil and it has 13,400 gallons of diesel onboard.  The vessel is on the north side of Pelican Island. [SEP] Map [SEP] Tide Height [SEP] tide current
A freight train car carrying molten sulfur derailed and sprung a leak on Saturday, 7 March 2009.  The USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of both the damaged rail car leaking molten sulfur and several reported empty hazmat rail cars that contained only residuals of anhydrous ammonia and styrene monomer.  The hot molten sulfur created an air threat forcing an evacuation. [SEP] A freight train car carrying molten sulfur derailed and sprung a leak on Saturday, 7 March 2009. The USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of both the damaged rail car leaking molten sulfur and several reported empty hazmat rail cars that contained only residuals of anhydrous ammonia and styrene monomer. The hot molten sulfur created an air threat forcing an evacuation. The incident occurred where the bridge crosses Plaquemine Bayou in the city of Plaquemine, LA (30?? 17.59???€? N Lat. 091?? 14.32???€? W Long.).  The threat was mostly from the rotten egg smell of hydrogen sulfide that has a very low odor threshold. Nobody was hurt. The five cars that derailed were near the rear of a 67-car train that was going 16 mph at the time of the accident. NOAA provided only verbal consultation to the USCG responding to the incident in conjunction with state authorities. The sulfur itself once cooled is not considered a major environmental concern. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator will follow up with the USCG on this incident to assess if there are any residual issues that would be of concern. If there are no follow up issues that involve the USCG and NOAA, this report will serve as the Initial and Final Hotline report. This could have been much worse.
The Alaskan SSC was notified at 0600 March 5 by Sector Anchorage that the 112 foot FV Mar-Gun grounded on the north side of St. George Island, the more southern of the two Pribilof Islands in the SE Bering Sea, Alaska. Five POB and the vessel had 15,000 gallons of diesel and grounded in 18 to 25 ft. of water. At the moment the Coast Guard is treating the incident strictly as a SAR case, although NOAA SSC and Sector Anchorage personnel are gearing up to treat this as a pollution case, and have called for a UC meeting morning of March 5. NOAA is providing weather, tides, ADIOS runs, and possible trajectories and impacts. Dan Magone from Dutch Harbor was hired as the vessel salvor to extricate it from its rocky grounding on the shoreline on the N. side of St. George Island. After several fits and starts, bad weather, labor difficulties, broken equipment,etc, etc. the vessel was finally refloated around the first of May and was taken to Dutch Harbor for final repairs. No significant amounts of oil were released during the incident. [SEP] CG Photo: Salvage operations and ice conditions around vessel [SEP] F/V Mar Gun photo 03/13 [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (ALASKA) API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 30 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 38 deg F Time of Initial Release = March 5, 0900 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 15,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 15,000 10 27 63 [SEP] F/V Mar Gun photo on 3/15 [SEP] 17MAR09 Update: No Fuel oil pumped off during operations on 17MAR09 due to heavy weather. Intentions are to continue pumping when conditions permit. Raised the FPN ceiling to $150,000.00. Four of the six CG Strike Team members departed from the island, as did the lone state representative and Ruth Yender, the acting NOAA SSC. John Whitney will be re-assuming that job, but conducting it from Anchorage unless the unlikely event of a large release. Prior to leaving the island, Ruth SCAT trained a couple of local folks, one a leader of the St. George Sentinel youth environmental monitoring group who were already conducting shoreline monitoring prior to and alongside Ruth; and an other a native resident who works with the NMFS. If needed, these folks can deploy immediately, if necessary, John Whitney can deploy with a day or two delay. Prior to leaving, Ruth and others had determined that the largest possible, most likely release would be from a compromised hose and that would amount to only around 70 gallons. Any shoreline cleanup is pretty much limited to the use of sorbents, of which numerous are available. So far pumping operations have flawlessly removed 17,195 gallons of petroleum fluids (mostly diesel) with 2600 gallons of a combination of diesel, hydraulic fluid, and lube oil remaining on the vessel. The heavy weather with winds from the north at over 30 kts combined with temperatures in the teens and twenties is causing considerable icing on the vessel and making it unsafe to approach and access the vessel. John Whitney, acting SSC in Anchorage Ruth Yender, departing SSC having served on St. George Island [SEP] Coast Guard Strike Team Photo of extensive ice on and around Mar-Gun: 3/26/09 [SEP] Shortly after 1 am LT, May 13, the F/V Mar Gun was towed / dragged off of St. George shoreline by the Tug Redeemer. The vessel will anchor in the nearest harbor (Zapadni on the south side of St. George Island) and monitor for watertight integrity overnight. A dive survey will be completed to assess the F/V Mar-Gun???€?s integrity. The shaft will be secured for transit and nets reloaded onboard. Approximately 300 gallons of diesel will be on board during the transit to run generators and pumps. If all goes well, she will be underway for ultimate destination Dutch Harbor following equipment checks at some point tomorrow. Pumps are being used to control water coming in through cracks in the shaft alley. Trawl doors were recovered from the grounding location during low tides last night. RESOURCES AFFECTED: There have been no reports of impacted wildlife at this time. FUTURE PLANS AND RECOMMENDATIONS: A towing plan is being submitted for the M/V Redeemer with the F/V Mar-Gun in tow to transit to Dutch Harbor. This could occur as early as Thursday morning. The transit is estimated to take a minimum of 30 hours. The captain and chief engineer of the F/V Mar-Gun will remain onboard to monitor pumps and regulate ballasting during transit. Subsistence sampling will occur during the next low tide cycle towards the end of the month. A subsistence sampling kit has been prepared and shipped to the island for this operation. WEATHER: Northeast winds 30 knots, seas 8 foot, temperature highs in the lower 40?? F with patchy fog. Winds decreasing tonight to 20 knots from the northeast, seas 5 foot, with patchy fog. John Whitney, NOAA SSC in Anchorage [SEP] Evening Report ???€? Friday, March 20, 2009: Unified Command meeting was held early this morning between Anchorage Command Post and operations and environmental folks on St. George Island. Preparations were made for using the Bell 206 helicopter for lightering operations to begin today. Additional safety plans have been implemented to account for helicopter operations. The entire #3 starboard tank was drained with a total of 1,700 gallons offloaded today. Personnel plan to leave 800 gallons of diesel fuel and 100 gallons of lube oil onboard for when salvage becomes possible. The hose from the vessel to the shore was collected and demobilized on the shore. There have been no reports of impacted wildlife at this time. A light, unrecoverable sheen was sighted last night extending eastward from the vessel an estimated 500-1000 yards. A SCAT team will assess the area today. John Whitney, SSC at Anchorage Command Post [SEP] The F/V Mar Gun remains hard aground off the north shore of St. George Island. Today the U.S. Pacific Strike Team and Magone Marine Services completed pumping diesel off the vessel except for a small amount that will be used to help cut the heavier fuels remaining to be removed. Approximately 800 gallons of service diesel will also be left aboard to run the vessel's generator. Approximately 1400 gallons of lube and hydraulic oils were consolidated in preparation for pumping tomorrow. Magone Marine Services patched some of the holes and continued preparations to salvage the vessel. Weather permitting, Magone Marine will deploy a 4-ton off-shore anchor and associated ground tackle from the stern of the Mar Gun tomorrow. NOAA activities: The SCAT team remains on stand-by and will be activated if the need arises. Today the SSC met with the newly established subsistence seafood monitoring advisory group and participated in several other response meetings. NOAA National Weather Service continues to provide daily spot weather forecasts. [SEP] The F/V Mar Gun remains hard aground and efforts continued today to remove fuel from the vessel. Progress has been slower than hoped due to equipment and weather challenges. Today the NOAA SSC led a survey of shorelines on the north side of St. George Island, including adjacent pinniped rookeries (unoccupied until May). No evidence of shoreline oiling was observed. The SSC also met with a tribal biologist who has been monitoring birds and pinnipeds in the vicinity of the grounding regarding any indications of potential wildlife impacts from sheen observed late last week. No impacts on wildlife have been observed. SSC plans for tomorrow include meeting with local tribal representatives to discuss concerns about potential impacts to subsistence resources harvested from the area near the vessel grounding. [SEP] RESPONSE ACTION: Weather continues to be a factor in this response. A team was able to access the vessel at low tide on Tuesday and final consolidation of fluids on the vessel was completed. An estimated 2,600 gallons of mixed product is stored in the #3 starboard wing tank. An additional 3 gallons of antifreeze was delivered to the vessel on Wednesday and added to the generator. The generator was again started and continues to run well. No additional fluids have been pumped to shore. 4 bags of oiled sorbents were removed from the vessel and placed in storage for eventual burning. An estimated 22 bags of waste are awaiting reactivation of the burner for this disposal. An estimated 3 days of burning will be needed for disposal of the remaining materials. A check of lines to the vessel on Wednesday evening revealed that one of the double braided lines had parted. This is one of the lines to which the remaining hose is secured. Today???€?s operations include the securing the ends of the remaining hose, retrieving it from the vessel and bringing it to shore. A new plan for removal of the remaining fluids has been submitted and is pending approval from the Unified Command. The M/V
On March 1, 2009, OR&R was notified of a 614ft-tanker that grounded @ approximately 0400 local time 12nm offshore off of Sabine Pass.  The tanker is carrying 112,330 gallons of fuel oil, 44,859 metric tons of molten sulfur, and 4500 gallons of diesel fuel.  Recovery planning is now underway with the USCG and RP.  Through the local Science Support Coordinator, NOAA provided trajectory and weather support.  (photo courtesy of USCG) [SEP] 5300 MT of sulfur has been offloaded from holds 2 and 3 on the ELTANIN as of 0800 10MAR09. Lightering operations are anticipated to take place for two more full working days. Refloating operations are currently scheduled to take place on 13MAR09, pending weather. A cold front is expected to increase rain and thunderstorms in the area for Thursday, Friday, and Saturday 12-14MAR09. The Unified Command will meet again prior to commencing refloat operations. O???€?Briens???€? Group continues to monitor for pollution. [SEP] Photo courtesy of the USCG. [SEP] Date: March 6, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Mary Barber FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential spill from Eltanin FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: T/V Elatanin grounded at about 0400 CST March 01, 2009 about 12 nm south of Calcasieu Pass. The location is 29?? 28.79'N by 93?? 49.91'W. No spill has occurred. The vessel has 112,330 gallons of heavy fuel oil, 4500 gallons of diesel, and 44,800 MT of sulfur in pellet form. Attempts to refloat the vessel has not been successful. The vessel's sulfur cargo will be offloaded in the next few days. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast South wind 10 - 15 knots for Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday of next week. 2) Trajectory Analysis Should a spill occur on Sunday or Monday under persistent winds from the S, we expect the oil to move to the NW. Shoreline impacts are likely to occur between High Island Texas, and Texas Point, at the entrance to Calasieu Bay within 15 - 20 hours after the spill. Should an actual spill occur, the NOAA SSC, Mary Barber should be contacted for an updated trajectory. [SEP] Date: March 2, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Mary Barber / USCG Keith Donohue FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded T/V Eltanin FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: T/V Elatanin grounded at about 0400 CST about 12 nm south of Calcasieu Pass. The location is 29?? 28.79'N by 93?? 49.91'W. No spill has occurred. The vessel has 112,330 gallons of fuel oil, 4500 gallons of diesel, and 44,800 MT of prilled sulfur. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast NE winds on Monday 5 - 10 knots SE winds Monday night 5 - 10 knots SE winds Tuesday and Tuesday night 10 - 15 knots S winds Wednesday through Friday at 10 - 15 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis For fuel: The type of fuel oil has not been reported but assuming it is a heavy persistent oil: Should a heavy fuel oil be lost today in a high enough quantity to persist for a few days, there would be potential tarballs impacts along the Eastern Texas shoreline between High Island and Bolivar Peninsula on Wednesday or Thursday. For prilled sulfur: We would expect solid sulfur in pellet form to sink and accumulate on the bottom within a few seconds to minutes depending upon how close to the bottom it was spilled and the size of the pellets. The sulfur would not dissolve. Eventually long period storm waves would disperse the prilled sulfur over a large area and mix it into the sediment. [SEP] The RP started offloading prilled sulfur at 2100 last night (08MAR09 Sunday), by this morning (09MAR09 Monday) they had 1450 MT offloaded. They expect offloading will continue until Thursday. Next Unified Command Meeting is tomorrow, 10MAR09 @ 1000. Update on progress will be given at that time. [SEP] At 1430 local time, the USCG updated the SSC with the following information. It is known that the ship is carrying heavy fuel oil. The size of the sulfur pellets(prilled sulfur) is unknown. As of 0930 this morning, one of two tugs sent to aide the vessel in distress was connected completely and powering at 20%. Further information is unknown at this time. [SEP] On the morning of 12MAR09, T/V Eltanin refloated with no pollution and is headed to the offshore reload area to reload the prilled sulfur and continue to it's port of call. USCG considers this case closed. [SEP] Output from CAFE for sulfur [SEP] Photo courtesy of the USCG. [SEP] Date: March 1, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Mary Barber / USCG Keith Donohue FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded T/V Eltanin FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: T/V Elatanin grounded at about 0400 CST about 12 nm south of Calcasieu Pass. The location is 29?? 28.79'N by 93?? 49.91'W. No spill has occurred. The vessel has 112,330 gallons of fuel oil, 4500 gallons of diesel, and 44,800 MT of molten sulfur. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast North winds Sunday becoming NE on Monday. South wind expected on Tuesday thru Thursday. 2) Trajectory Analysis For fuel: The type of fuel oil has not been reported but assuming it is a heavy persistent oil: Should oil spill on Sunday or Monday we would not expect any immediate shoreline impacts with winds blowing offshore on Sunday and from the NE on Monday. However, should a significant amount of heavy fuel oil spill, we would expect it to persist long enough to result in tarballs impacts later in the week (Wednesday - Thursday) when winds come from the South. With the forecast winds from the S on Tuesday thru Thursday the coastal currents along the Texas/Louisiana border will be in transition. Potential tarball impacts could occur anywhere along the border. Should oil spill over the next few days, an update trajectory forecast should be requested from the NOAA SSC. For molten sulfur: http://cameochemicals.noaa.gov/chemical/4562 Should the molten sulfur spill, we would expect it to solidify and sink to the bottom. We do not expect it to react with any oil that should spill and we expect very little of the sulfur to enter solution. The sulfur will sink and remain on the bottom as a solid. [SEP] http://cameochemicals.noaa.gov/chemical/4562 This is really cool to have available online! [SEP] LSU Prilled Sulfur Hazards
A 36' yacht hand grouded off Wassaw Sound GA during bad weather.  Vessel had 170 gallons of gasoline.  ALl persons rescued and vessel under tow back to safe harbor. [SEP] Google Map of grounding site [SEP] Date: 1930 EDT, Saturday, Februrary 28, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Jim Jeansonne FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: 36 foot yacht aground in Savana River FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A 36 foot yacht ran aground at around 1600-1700 EDT near buoy 22 off Wassaw Sound. It was hard aground and carrying about 170 gal. gasoline. As of 1750 EDT vessel was under tow by SeaTow. The location was given as 31??55.895'N--087??57.776'W, and is 3/4 of a Mile or more from shoreline in all directions. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Winds Forecast Tornado watch in effect untill 3am EST Sunday. Small craft advisory in effect from midnight tonight through monday afternoon. Tonight: Winds for the SW 15 to 20 knots increasing to 20 to 25 knots with gust up to 30 knots late. Sunday: Winds from the SW at 20 to 25 knots with gusts up to to 30 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis Gasoline is a very light fuel and will evaporate and disperse rapidly. In the strong winds, and waves, we expect any spilled fule to disperse very quickly, probably not leaving even a visible sheen for any length of time. That ship locatio is almost a mile from shore, so we do not ecpect any shoreline contact at all. 3) Resources at risk With the strong winds, much of the spilled fuel is likely to be dispersed into the water column. This can create a toxic hazard, but it will be highly localized. Some local biota could be killed in a small area. It is unlikely that any effects will be noticable in the longer term. 4) Oil Fate Gasoline is a light refined product with a specific gravity that can range from 0.76 to 0.70 at 15??C (54 to 70 API). The product typically has a very high evaporation rate and does not tend to create persistent slicks. For a release this small, in open water conditions and with wind speeds greater than 10 knots, 90% of the gasoline is expected to evaporate within the first 1 hour or sooner of the initial release. When spilled, the gasoline spreads quickly into thin films by forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film is common. Normally, this type of release does not become an involved cleanup problem. There is a high flammability hazard associated with gasoline spills. Specifically, if a spill is kept from spreading freely by natural or man-made structures the gasoline slick might be thick enough to support ignition. In addition, vapor concentrations near the source of spill or vapors collected in sheltered areas can present an explosion hazard. Please note that gasoline does have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tends to be more soluble and more toxic then heavier oils. In high energy environments, the gasoline is likely to disperse as small droplets in the water column. Gasoline spills can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat, particularly in low energy marine environments such as shallow bays and inlets.
Early morning of Wed., Feb. 25, Sector Anchorage received word that the 58' FV Icy Mist was taking on water north of Akutan Island with 4 POB along with 2700 gallons of diesel, 150 gallons of hydraulic oil,  200 gallons of lube oil, and 60,000 lbs of Pacific Cod.  Conditions were horrific with  sustained winds of 60 to 70 kts and  gusts approaching 100 kts.   Vessel was intentionally beached on a rocky shoreline shadowed by a high vertical cliff face.  The 4 POB were rescued by Coast Guard helo, and the status of the fuel onboard is unknown at this time.Initially, from an overflight, no pollution was reported, and the vessel appeared to be in good condition.  However on up close examination, the bottom of the vessel was found to be badly damaged causing a release of all the diesel and all the hydralic oil.   The 200 gallons of lube oil was removed.    NOAA SSC  provided weather forecast support throughout as well as information on the fate of the oil if a release occurred.   The state of Alaska will managed both the disposal of the Pacific cod and the vessel. [SEP] Tuesday morning, March 3, Sit rep Over the past couple of days, Magone Marine personnel and the FV Icy Mist owner have made several attempts to reach the vessel via helo access and manual descent of the high cliff above the grounding, in order to assess the condition of the vessel and attempt to remove any remaining petroleum. The high winds and inclement weather have allowed only a couple of these missions to be successful. The accompanying photos show the high cliff above the rocky shoreline where the vessel grounded as well as the extensive damage to the hull bottom stern. This damage completely compromised the 2700 gallons of diesel in the fuel tanks. One 55 gal drum of lube oil was removed via a helo sling load leaving 150 gallons of lube, while the hydraulic fluid has totally been released. Magone hopes to complete the oil removal today weather permitting. At this point, the State of Alaska will manage the removal of the 60,000 lbs of Pacific Cod as well as of the vessel from the rocky shoreline. Weather forecast for Tues. morning, March 3, 2009: EASTERN ALEUTIANS CAPE SARICHEF TO NIKOLSKI 400 AM AKST TUE MAR 3 2009 ...GALE WARNING TONIGHT AND WEDNESDAY... .TODAY...N WIND 20 KT BECOMING SE IN THE AFTERNOON. SEAS 10 FT. .TONIGHT...S WIND 35 KT. SEAS BUILDING TO 15 FT. RAIN. .WED...SW WIND 40 KT. SEAS 18 FT. RAIN. .WED NIGHT...SW WIND 45 KT. SEAS 21 FT. .THU...W WIND 30 KT. SEAS 20 FT. .FRI...SW WIND 35 KT. SEAS 20 FT. .SAT...SE WIND 20 KT. SEAS 12 FT. [SEP] Google Earth view of location of Akutan Island in eastern Aleutians [SEP] Date: Feb. 25, 2009 To: Cdr Steve Pearson, Sector Anchorage From: John Whitney, NOAA SSC for Alaska Subject: Weather and potential oil fate for 58???€? F/V Icy Mist grounded on NW side of Akutan Island w/ 4 POB and 2500 gal diesel and 100 gal lube oil Location of Grounding: 54-13N, 165-58W on exposed rocky shoreline Summary of action: vessel was taking on water and intentionally grounded; 4 POB were able to escape on to the shore and were successfully rescued via a USCG HH-60 helo after initial unsuccessful attempts with the HH-65 CG helo Weather Forecast from Anchorage NWS: Current Obs: Dutch Harbor and Unalaska Bay ???€? gusts 35 to 45 Knots, will continue until around 4 pm today Forecast: Wed. evening ???€? winds continue to decrease to NW 20 kt after midnight; Seas at 20???€? during the day decreasing to above 15???€? by midnight Thur: winds variable 15 kts becoming 20 kts S winds later in day; Seas decreasing to 10???€? by afternoon Thurs night: another front hitting from the west with S winds 35-40 kts which will continue through Friday morning, diminishing Fri afternoon Possible Fate of Diesel and Lube Oil: Worst case is instantaneous release of both the diesel and the lube oil. NW gusts of 35-45 kts will rapidly disperse and dissipate this amount of diesel and lube oil within a few hours, with a transient sheen possibly extending offshore as much as 100 meters. A release at any less rate would result in more rapid dispersion and dissipation of the fuel and smaller sheen. At this time, no release of oil has been reported. Response: The location of the vessel under the present weather conditions renders any type of pollution response unnecessary and virtually impossible. [SEP] Overview photo from Magone showing rocky shoreline and high cliff around vessel [SEP] Close up photo by Magone of hull stern damage [SEP] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J1t6jCxP8bs [SEP] weather forecast for March 2, 2009 from Alaska NWS [SEP] NWS Weather forecast-Friday morning, Feb. 27 [SEP] The owner of the FV Icy Mist has contracted with Magone Marine in Dutch Harbor to access, remove the fuel, and salvage the Icy Mist. Plans are to fly in a commercial helo from Dutch Harbor this afternoon, Friday, out to the vessel and make an assessment of the logistics necessary to remove the roughly 3000 gallons of fuel. Magone Marine plans to pump oil into barrels and fly it out by commercial helicopter. This actual operation could occur sometime tomorrow when the winds are somewhat more favorable. [SEP] Overview of vessel grounding and adjacent high cliffs; photo from Magone [SEP] Thurs, Feb. 26: Check out the CG video at http://www.adn.com/. It shows vessel on beach as well as SAR efforts.
At about 1200 on Friday, Feb 20 the Yasa Golden Dardenells ground about 29 nm from the entrance to Galveston Bay. ERD duty officer received the call from CG at about 0430 CST on Saturday, Feb 21. The vessel has not leaked any oil. It has 621,000 bbls of low sulfur #2 fuel oil onboard. NOAA SSC Charlie Henry has been notified. [SEP] RAR, GOM Waters Offshore Galveston Bay [SEP] The ship is still aground and riding well in its current state. The salvor is on the ship with their naval architect. They initially decided that it is not necessary to ballast the ship down at this point, so there is no ballasting plan in motion at this time. Tugs are still attached at both quarters w/ light strain. There was little success during the last refloat attempt. The ship's bow swung 4-6 degrees and moved south 60-80 feet. The lightering option is now moving forward at this time. A lightering ship has been identified and is staging at present. The USCG reports that the intention is to commence lightering operations Monday morning at 0800 CST. [SEP] Date: Feb 21, 2009 Time: 0535 CST To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Vessel aground off Galveston FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: Vessel aground about 29 nm SE of the entrance to Galveston Bay with 621,000 bbls of low sulfur #2 fuel oil. The location is reported as 29?? 5' 12.84" N by 094?? 15' 3.96"W. The vessel has been ground on Heald Bank since about noon Friday. No oil has been leaked but vessel is hard aground. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Saturday: SE winds at 10 knots. Saturday night: At about 1800 winds are expected to become NW at 15 - 25 knots Sunday: N to NE winds at 15 knots Monday: NE winds becoming E at 10 - 15 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis Should oil be spilled on Saturday or Sunday we would not expect any landfall within the forecast period which runs through Monday because of the predicted cold front passage which will bring offshore winds starting tonight and into Monday. The coastal currents are moving downcoast (toward the SW) at about 1/4 - 1/3 of a knot. We would expect this to continue into Monday as the winds shift. A spill on Saturday would result in slick or sheen that would initially to the WSW at about 1/2 knot until the winds shifted early this evening. Then the sheen would move offshore to the SSE under the 15 - 25 knot winds from the NW. The oil would continue to move to the S and further offshore on Sunday. A spill on Sunday would result in a slick or sheen moving to the S to SE at about 1/2 knot into Monday. We do not expect oil to threaten the Flower Gardens which are over 70 nm to the SE of the grounding position. The # 2 fuel oil would not persist long enough to impact the Flower Gardens under the given conditions. 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model under 10 - 15 knot wind conditions: For a #2 fuel oil spill of over 400,000 bbls 50% would evaporate or disperse by 36 hours 90% would evaporate and disperse by 96 hours [SEP] http://tabs.gerg.tamu.edu/Tglo/ Note winds will be shifting later today Downcoast currents at1/4 - 1/3 knot [SEP] Vessel hard aground at Heald Bank (credit, USCG). [SEP] The USCG reported that the grounded tank ship Yasa Golden Dardanelles was successfully refloated at 1208 a.m. this morning (24 Feb.). The ship, an 800-foot tanker with 26 crewmembers, was carrying 621,000 barrels of home heating oil when it ran aground off the coast of Galveston on Friday, February 21. The tank ship did not discharge oil nor did salvage operations impede other vessel traffic. A Unified Command consisting of the Coast Guard, the ship's owner, Texas General Land Office, United States Mineral Management Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association, Titan Salvage, O'Brien's Response Management and the Marine Spill Response Corporation has worked around-the-clock over the past four days to free the vessel expeditiously while minimizing environmental impact. The ship was freed by lightering over 80,000 barrels of oil to another tank ship. The transfer was conducted safely ensuring no harm to the personnel working, no pollution release into the environment, and no damage to the vessel. Coast Guard personnel on-scene oversaw the operation. This morning, commercial divers will perform an underwater hull inspection, and naval engineers and inspectors from the ship's classification society will examine the ship before it enters port. Unless the situation changes, this entry will serve as the final report for the grounding. [SEP] http://www.dallasnews.com/sharedcontent/APStories/stories/D96G5R0O6.html Coast Guard working to free grounded tanker 02/21/2009 Associated Press An oil tanker remained grounded Saturday off the Texas coast in the Gulf of Mexico, but no fuel had spilled from it, officials said. The U.S. Coast Guard, other federal and state agencies and a salvage company have been planning a strategy for freeing the 800-foot vessel, the Yasa Golden Dardanelles. It's carrying 620,000 barrels of low sulfur fuel oil, said Coast Guard spokeswoman Renee Aiello. "This is something we prepare for," she said. "Fortunately, events like this are not frequent. But we are the Coast Guard, and we are prepared for this type of event." A Coast Guard helicopter flew over the ship and saw no evidence of pollution, Aiello said. The tanker was built by Mitsui Engineering & Shipbuilding Co. in Japan and delivered last spring to Yasa Tanker and Transportation S.A. of Istanbul, Turkey, according to a news release issued by Mitsui at the time. It flies under the flag of the Marshall Islands. A woman who answered the phone at the Turkish company Saturday said nobody was available to discuss the matter. The tanker ran aground 22 miles off the coast in sand sometime Friday while waiting for a pilot to guide it into the Houston Ship Channel. The ship ran aground on the north side of the Galveston Safety Fairway, an area that leads to the ship channel, Aiello said. Coast Guard officials are hopeful that high tide, due to occur between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m. could help in refloating the ship. While plans are being made to remove the ship, the Coast Guard is continuing to observe it, she said. "Right now, we're keeping a close eye on the situation," she said. A spokesman for Titan Salvage confirmed that the company is involved in the operation. [SEP] Vessel hard aground at Heald Bank (credit, USCG). [SEP] YASA GOLDEN DARDANELLES GROUNDING GOM, Galveston Island, TX 1600 CST, Monday February 23, 2009 Sunrise/Sunset: Sunset (02/22) : 1815 CST Sunrise (02/23): 0650 CST Sunset (02/23) : 1816 CST Forecast: Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Tuesday: winds predicted to be from the S at 10-15 knots. Tuesday night: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Wednesday: winds are predicted to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Thursday: winds are forecast to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Friday: : winds expected to be from the S at 10-15 knots. Precipitation: No precipitation is forecast in the region through Friday. Seas: Tonight: seas 3-4 feet. Tuesday: seas 4-5 feet. Tuesday night: seas 4-6 feet. Wednesday: seas 5-7 feet. Thursday night: seas 6-9 feet. Friday: seas 5-7 feet. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the near 70 to lows near 60. [SEP] Detailed Map [SEP] http://coastguardnews.com/coast-guard-msu-galveston-responds-to-grounded-tank-ship/2009/02/21/ GALVESTON, Texas ???€? Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Galveston is responding to the grounding of an 800-foot tank ship 22 miles off the coast of Galveston, which occurred Friday, Feb. 20, 2009. The tank ship Yasa Golden Dardanelles, ran aground on the north side of the Galveston safety fairway, which leads to the Houston Ship Channel. The tank ship is not discharging oil nor is it impeding other vessel traffic. The Yasa Golden Dardanelles reports having approximately 620,000 barrels of fuel oil on board. Coast Guard personnel conducted a preliminary investigation of the grounding late Friday night. An over flight conducted by an Air Station Houston MH-65 helicopter crew early this morning did not find any signs of pollution from the ship. Coast Guard personnel are working closely with the ship???€?s owner, Texas General Land Office, United States Mineral Management Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association, and Titan Salvage, the appointed salvage company, to devise a plan to minimize environmental impact and free the tank ship at the earliest opportunity. [SEP] USCG MSU Galveston reports that the lightering ops were complete as of 1912 hrs; 83,834.37BBL of fuel oil were transferred (@60F). The hose/lines are being disconnected now and the tugs will assist the
On Wednesday, Feb. 18, 2009 at 1700 CST a pipeline mishap resulted in about 600 bbls of crude oil being spilled into the Rocky Ford Creek in Cygnet, Oh.   EPA is the FOSC and asked us for river flow information.  Booming efforts to hold the oil in the creek failed and the oil has entered the Portage River. [SEP] NWS River Forecast Center Ohio predicts that the Portage River and tributaries will have a rise of approximately 6???€? in water level over the next 2-3 days then hold steady at that level. [SEP] NWS River Forecast Center Ohio predicts that the Portage River and tributaries will have a slight rise of over the next day or two then the water level will begin to trend downward. [SEP] NWS river forecast center Ohio predicts that the Portage River and tributaries will be slowly dropping over the next 4 - 5 days. No dramatic changes, just a slow drop. [SEP] See EPA's version of hotline for the spill. http://www.epaosc.net/site_profile.asp?site_id=4754 Attached is photo of oil and ice from EPA website [SEP] Called by Trichia Edwards, EPA on Tuesday Feb 24. They need more river forecast. So far they have recovered 650 bbls of oil. The river has dropped since the spill and they have burned the vegetation along the banks of the creek that was oiled. No fish kill reported. No birds oil (it is winter) They have a lot of snow and ice that is beginning to melt so they need a forecast. Sheen extened about 7 miles downstream in Portage River [SEP] http://waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis/uv?site_no=04195820
On 18 February 2009, NOAA was notified by the Texas General Land Office (TGLO) of an offshore gas and gas condensate release near Matagorda Island, Texas.  The initial NRC report (#897816) stated that a 1 mile x 1 mile sheen was observed associated with a 24” natural gas line failure at a platform. [SEP] (provided by TGLO) [SEP] The pipeline has been shut in. USCG is conducting a morning overflight to assess an pollution issues. This report will be updated when that information is available. [SEP] (provided by TGLO) [SEP] Pipeline remains shut in and no pollution was observed during the overflight. This entry serves as the final report. [SEP] On 18 February 2009, NOAA was notified by the Texas General Land Office (TGLO) of an offshore gas and gas condensate release near Matagorda Island, Texas. The initial NRC report (#897816) stated that a 1 mile x 1 mile sheen was observed associated with a 24???€? natural gas line failure at a platform. Clearly, the potential for fire and explosion near source was the most immediate issue. Secondly, would be the threat of the release to the marine and costal environment. The reported position was 27?? 57' 36" N Long. 096?? 33' 54" W Long. This location is approximately 20 miles offshore due E of Rockport, Texas. TGLO???€?s Scientific Support Coordinator evaluated the potential fate and trajectory of the observed slick. In short, the analysis suggested that the slick would move parallel to shore and dissipate. NOAA is monitoring the situation. Preliminary Trajectory Analysis Preliminary trajectory indicated a spill originating at 27?? 57' 36" N Long. 096?? 33' 54" W Long. traveling parallel to the coast about 15 miles to the southwest from its original position from 8am this morning to 8am tomorrow morning (see GNOME Model Predictions). The oil was reported at one point as a 32 API condensate crude. The value was later updated to an API gravity of 50.2???€? a value more in-line with a condensate. Such light oils generally dissipate by evaporation and natural dispersion into the water column. At the end of the day, there was no update as to the status of the release.
At approximately 0940 PST, on February 18, 2009, CA-OSPR contacted ERD regarding an incident in Santa Cruz, CA.  They reported silver-dollar size tarballs coming ashore since 1700 on Feb. 17, 2009. Volume unknown. RP unknown. ERD contacted to provide hind-cast trajectory information. [SEP] Indications are that the tarballs came from the S to SW, how far, depends upon how long they have been in the water. These conditions are similar to the last time. OK here is a summary of the conditions off Central California for the past few days. Winds: NDBC buoy 46011 - Santa Maria - 21 nm NW of Point Arugello, Ca http://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/data/realtime2/46011.txt Winds have been primarily from the S since last Friday(2/13) morning. Winds have been between SE to SW between 5 t0 30 knots. There was a strong SSE - SE wind event from the evening of 2/14 into Monday morning (2/16). Winds were between 20 - 30 knots from 190 to 120 degrees. NDBC buoy 46042 - Monterey - 27 nm West of Monterey Bay, Ca http://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/data/5day2/46042_5day.txt Feb 17th: SSW (200?? - 210??) winds at 20 to 25 knots from midnight to 0700 SSW- SW winds (210?? - 240??) at 10 - 20 knots from 0800 - 2100 Currents: http://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/data/5day2/46042_5day.txt See attached plot from the ADCP on the buoy. The bin is at 4 meters from the surface. Currents have had a southerly component since the evening of the 15th, and at times been over 1 knot. ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ So how far from the south could the oil have come from? Let's suppose upcoast currents that average 1/3 knots since midnight between the 15th and 16th. That would be about 42 hours before the oil showed up at Santa Cruz. So that means 14 nm just from the currents. The winds average about 15 knots over this period along the outer coast so that would be about 21 nm from the windage. That means a total of about 35 nm of transport since midnight Sunday Santa Barbara Channel is about 180 nm from Monterey Bay. For the oil to have come from Pt Conception would take about a week. Did the oil come from the Monterey Formation? It could. Could the oil have come from the offshore shipping lanes? It could.
The F/V Maranatha and Tug Mary L collided at 1905 (local)in Tampa Bay near thePort Manatee Entrance at position 27-39.5N; 082-35.5W during heavy fog.  TheMaranatha's fuel tank was damaged.  The tank had 4000 gallons of diesel in itand the Captain reported that he plugged the tank and estimates throughsoundings that 1500 gallons had spilled.  The Tug was not damaged.  Boom isexpected to be on scene  around 2300 (local). [SEP] Photo of starboard side of F/V Maranatha at anchor with boom placed around it. Vessel has a deliberate list to port to keep fuel away from the damaged area that was leaking fuel. Photo by NOAA (Jeansonne), 13Feb09. [SEP] tides [SEP] WS Tampa Bay web forecast Synopsis...A WEAKENING COLD FRONT WILL DISSIPATE ACROSS THE CENTRAL COASTAL WATERS TONIGHT. WEAK HIGH PRESSURE WILL BUILD INTO THE AREA FROM THE NORTH ON FRIDAY. THE REMNANT BOUNDARY ACROSS THE AREA WILL LIFT NORTH AS LOW PRESSURE MOVES THROUGH THE MID-WESTERN STATES FRIDAY NIGHT AND SATURDAY...WITH THE TRAILING COLD FRONT STALLING ACROSS NORTH FLORIDA SATURDAY NIGHT AND SUNDAY. THE COLD FRONT WILL MOVE THROUGH THE WATERS SUNDAY NIGHT FOLLOWED BY STRONG HIGH PRESSURE BUILDING SOUTHWARD TOWARD THE WATERS ON MONDAY AND TUESDAY. Tonight...North winds around 5 knots becoming northeast after midnight. Seas 2 feet. Bay and inland waters smooth. Patchy fog. Friday...Southeast winds 5 to 10 knots becoming southwest in the afternoon. Seas 2 feet. Bay and inland waters a light chop. Patchy fog in the morning. Friday Night...South winds around 5 knots. Seas 2 feet. Bay and inland waters a light chop. Patchy fog after midnight. Saturday...South winds around 10 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Bay and inland waters a light chop. [SEP] Shoreline along north-west portion of spill island surveyed. No fuel was detected along the portions of the island shoreline surveyed. Photo by NOAA (Jeansonne) taken 13Feb09. [SEP] NOAA SSCr (Jeansonne) participated in an environmental survey of the areas around the collision site between 0930 and 1100 hours local. Aditionally, a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter surveyed the entire middle and lower Tampa Bay area for signs of the diesel spilled. No sign of diesel was observed or smelled at the Port Manatee Island near the entrance to Port Manatee. No sheens were observed during the survey and at the time visibility was unrestricted. Current estimate of the amount spilled is 800-1000 gallons diesel. During the night and through about 0700 local, heavy fog resulted in very limited visibility. However, responders did report transiting through diesel sheens and the strong smell of diesel as they moved around the area and to/from shore. During the night, the leak was stopped. The shrimper was anchored and stablized with a deliberate port list to raise the leak site above the level of fuel and all but 100 gallons of fuel was transfered to other tanks. the Tug/barge combination did not appear to have been significantly damaged. A FWC research fish hatchery at Port Manatee was notified by the SSCr at 0730 and they have secured their water intakes as needed. At noon they were advised that no diesel was currently being observed or expected in the vicinity of their facility. The Captain of the Port (COTP), on advice from his staff and the on-scene responders, released the two vessels involved to return to their docks and was in the process of re-opening the port to vessel traffic. At that time the COTP decided to begin shutting down the active pollution response. SSCr departed the scene at 1115 local and proceeded to the office in St. Petersburg. [SEP] Hole is in side of boat underneath the life ring. Hole has a pinkish plug. Photo by NOAA (Jeansonne) 13Feb09. [SEP] white line shows predicted extent of oil movement
The regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by USCG Sector New Orleans of a mystery slick in the Black Bay area.  A USCG helicopter overflight at 1700 hrs confirmed the presence of a small slick roughly 0.25 x 0.25 miles in size composed of silver sheen with spots of dark oil.  The initial reported location was 29° 31’ 59” N Lat. 089° 29’ 05” W Long at 10:43 (local time) on 9 February 2009.  This position places the slick roughly in Black Bay, 13 miles NE of Nairn and more than 15 miles NW of Breton Island.  USCG Sector New Orleans requested a trajectory analysis.
U.S Coast Guard Sector Honolulu notified the NOAA SSC that the USS Port Royal, a Pearl Harbor-based navy guided missile cruiser, is hard aground at the entrance to Pearl Harbor at coordinates 21 degrees 17.48 north, 157 degrees 55.23 west. The location is approximately a half a mile south of Honolulu Airport's Reef Runway and a mile and a half from the entrance of Pearl Harbor.No oil has been released at this time. The vessel is taking on water, however, the water is contained in the space adjacent to the sonar array. It is believed that only the sonar array is aground. Operations to free the vessel, reportedly grounded on sand and crushed coral rock, are in progress. The vessel is reported to be carrying 250,000 gallons of navy marine diesel and 1000 gallons of JP5 aboard. [SEP] The USS Port Royal was successfully freed between 0200 and 0300 this morning and then towed into Naval Station Pearl Harbor for further inspection, assessment, and development of repair plans. An overflight at first light indicated a small sheen, which dissipated within a few hours. NOAA ERD provided a trajectory forecast for the small oil sheen observed and a weather spot-forecast update. The U.S. Navy and US Coast Guard Sector Honolulu thanked NOAA ERD for the technical support and assistance during the incident response over the weekend. [SEP] S Oahu Map [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR USS PORT ROYAL, HONOLULU HI 1030 HST, Sunday February 08, 2009 Sunset(02/08) : 1825(HST) Sunrise (2/09): 0706 Sunset (2/09) : 1826 Spot Forecast for 1/2 mile off Honolulu Airport: WINDS: Sunday(2/8): Expect moderate trade wind all day and evening at 10 - 15 knots from the ENE Monday(2/9) Continued trade winds from the E at 10 - 15 knots Tuesday (2/10) Continued trade winds from the E at 10 - 15 knots SEAS: Sunday (2/8): 2-3 foot swell from the S at 16 sec with wind waves 1 - 3 feet Monday (2/9): 2 foot swell from the S with wind waves 2 - 3 feet PRECIPITATION: A very light chance of thundershower activity today and tomorrow. Primarily over land areas. EXTENDED FORECAST: Trade winds expected to increase to 15 - 20 knots on Wednesday and into Thursday. Thursday night into Friday expect the ENE trades to increase to 20 - 30 knots. Strong trades expected into Saturday. [SEP] wikipedia File photo: Port Royal in foreground [SEP] Honolulu Advertiser Story [SEP] Photo of grounded USS Port Royal [SEP] New Map [SEP] Chart 19369. Vessel is about .5 nm from Reef Runway. [SEP] Photo of grounded USS Port Royal [SEP] The USS Port Royal remains hard aground near the mouth of Pearl Harbor. The next attempt to free the vessel will be made at the high tide Saturday morning at approximately 0245 HST. No diesel has been released from the vessel. Oil spill response equipment has been staged nearby in the event of a release. [SEP] Navy frees stuck warship off coast of Honolulu Monday, February 09, 2009 PrintShareThis PEARL HARBOR, Hawaii ???€? The Navy says it has freed the $1 billion warship that ran aground close to the coast of Honolulu. The Navy issued a statement saying the USS Port Royal was removed from a rock and sand shoal early Monday. Crews had to remove about 500 tons of water and 100 tons of anchors and other equipment to lighten the vessel. After that work was completed it took a salvage ship and seven tugs about 40 minutes to work the ship loose. The guided missile cruiser ran aground Thursday just off Honolulu International Airport. It was visible to everyone flying in and out of Oahu and also was in clear view from a nearby public beach park. The Port Royal, based at Pearl Harbor, is one of the Navy's most advanced ships. Copyright 2009 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed. [SEP] USS PORT ROYAL, PEARL HARBOR, HI 0900 HST, Monday February 09, 2009 Sunset (02/09): 1826 Sunrise (02/10): 0704 Sunset (02/10): 1827 Forecast: Today: winds expected to be from the E at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the E at 10-15 knots. Tuesday: winds predicted to be from the E at 10-15 knots. Tuesday night: winds from the E at 10-15 knots. Wednesday: winds are predicted to be from the E at 10-15 knots. Thursday: winds are forecast to be from the E at 15-20 knots. Friday: : winds expected to be from the E at 20-25 knots. Precipitation: Isolated showers are forecast in the region through Friday. Seas: Today: seas 3-4 feet. Tonight: seas 3-4 feet. Tuesday: seas 3-4 feet. Tuesday night: seas 3-4 feet. Wednesday: seas 3-5 feet. Thursday night: seas 4-7 feet. Friday: seas 6-10 feet. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the near 80 to lows in the mid 60's.
Shortly after noon (local time) on 1 Feb. 2009 (Super Bowl Sunday), the NOAA HAZMAT Duty Officer notified the regional Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a request for support from USCG Marine Safety Unit Morgan City, LA.  The MSU was notified of a reported observed slick some 20 miles off Marsh Island in the vicinity of South Marsh Block 243.  The observed slick was reported as 1 x 6 miles in size an estimated by the observer as 600 bbls of crude oil (note this value was an estimate only).  No additional information is known at this time other than the suspected source is thought to be a pipeline failure. [SEP] (credit, NOAA) [SEP] Wx Information: At present, NOAA Station MRSL1 off Marsh Island is not reporting, but the 1000 hr report (the same time as the reported slick observation) was SE wind at 15 kts (just over 17 mph). Marine Weather Forecast Synopsis...MODERATE SOUTHERLY WINDS ARE EXPECTED IN ADVANCE OF A COLD FRONT. SHOWER AND THUNDERSTORM CHANCES WILL INCREASE AHEAD OF AND ALONG THE FRONT TODAY THROUGH MONDAY MORNING. STRONG NORTHERLY WINDS WILL DEVELOP MONDAY AFTERNOON BEHIND THE FRONT. Today (1 Feb.). S winds 10 to 15 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. A chance of showers and thunderstorms. Tonight, SE winds 5 to 10 knots becoming east 10 to 15 knots after midnight. Seas 2 to 3 feet. A chance of showers and thunderstorms in the evening hours and showers likely with isolated thunderstorms after midnight. Monday. N winds 15 to 20 knots. Seas 2 to 4 feet. A chance of rain in the morning, but only a slight chance of rain in the afternoon. Monday Night. N winds 15 to 20 knots becoming NE 10 to 15 knots after midnight. Seas 2 to 4 feet. Tuesday...North winds around 15 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Wednesday...Northeast winds 10 to 15 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Marsh Island Area (NWS On-Line Spot Forecast) Sunday (1 Feb). A 50 percent chance of showers this afternoon. Cloudy, with a high near 69. South wind between 10 and 15 mph. Tonight: Showers and thunderstorms likely before midnight, then showers likely and possibly a thunderstorm after midnight. Cloudy, with a low around 55. South wind 5 to 15 mph becoming north. Chance of precipitation is 60%. Monday: A 50 percent chance of rain, mainly before noon. Mostly cloudy, with a high near 60. North wind between 15 and 20 mph, with gusts as high as 25 mph. Monday Night: Mostly clear, with a low around 42. North wind between 15 and 20 mph, with gusts as high as 25 mph. Tuesday: Sunny, with a high near 64. North wind between 10 and 15 mph, with gusts as high as 20 mph. Tuesday Night: Mostly clear, with a low around 46. North wind between 10 and 15 mph, with gusts as high as 20 mph. Wednesday: Sunny, with a high near 58. Northeast wind between 10 and 15 mph, with gusts as high as 20 mph. Wednesday Night: Mostly clear, with a low around 49. Northeast wind around 10 mph. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] At 1218 hrs on 1 Feb. 2009 (Super Bowl Sunday), the NOAA HAZMAT Duty Officer notified the regional Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a request for support from USCG Marine Safety Unit Morgan City, LA. The SSC immediately followed up this request by contacting the USCG. The MSU was notified of a reported observed slick some 20 miles off Marsh Island in the vicinity of South Marsh Block 243. The observed slick was reported as 1 x 6 miles in size an estimated by the observer as 600 bbls of crude oil (note this value was an estimate only). No additional information is known at this time other than the suspected source is thought to be a pipeline failure. The SSC provided the requested analysis. A second overflight observation report that conditions were essentially unchanged at 1345 hrs (roughly four hours later).
Call received from Sector Juneau at 0300, Jan. 30,  reporting that the Alaska Marine Highway ferry, the MV Lituya was aground on Scrub Island roughly one-half mile north of Metlakatla, SE Alaska, in 50 to 80 knot winds.  The vessel was successfully abandoned, but has 7000 gals of diesel onboard.   So far nothing has been released.   Sector Juneau requested a trajectory and weather forecast. [SEP] Map2 [SEP] News Release Date: Jan. 30, 2009 Contact: Lt. Brierley Ostrander Phone: 907-463-2980 Alaska State Ferry breaks free from mooring, aground JUNEAU, Alaska - The Alaska State Ferry Lituya, a 180-foot motor vessel home ported in Metlakatla, Alaska, broke loose from its moorings at the ferry pier in Metlakatla and is reported aground one mile north on Scrub Island, Alaska, in Port Chester at 1 a.m. Friday. Coast Guard Cutter Anthony Petit, a 175-foot buoy tender home ported in Ketchikan, Alaska, is making preparations to get underway and is scheduled to arrive on scene at sunrise. Coast Guard Air Station Sitka and Coast Guard Station Ketchikan will launch assets as soon as weather conditions permit. No one was on board the Lituya at the time of the incident. Current weather conditions in the vicinity are winds from the southeast at 26 mph with gusts up to 80 mph, visibility is 3 miles, overcast with heavy rain and seas of six to eight-feet. The Alaska Marine Highway System, Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation and Coast Guard Sector Juneau are working together to respond. ### The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] MV Lituya aground North of Metlakatla [SEP] Map3 [SEP] Readable ADIOS oil fate table [SEP] Tidal height - Metlakatla, Jan. 29-Feb. 1 [SEP] Date: Jan 30, 2009 Time: 0415 AST To: NOAA SSC John Whitney FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential Diesel Spill from grounded M/V Lituya FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The M/V Lituya has ground in SE Alaska off the town of Metlakatla, Ak. Coordinates are reported to be 55?? 8.44'W by 131?? 34.11'W. This is on the West side of Annette I. The vessel is reported to have 7,000 gallons of diesel fuel. No oil has been lost at this time. Note, originally the amount of oil reported was 70,000 gallons, this has been corrected to 7,000 gallons. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast S- SE winds 20 - 30 knots thru Saturday 2) Trajectory Analysis for an instantaneous 7,000 gallon diesel spill: Under 25-30 knot winds from S- SE With 25 - 30 knot winds from the S-SE expect about 30% of the oil to disperse into the water column within 6 hours of the spill. High concentrations of oil in the water column within 100 yards of the spill may result in water column and bottom dwelling organisms being impacted. Floating oil will impact Copper Pt and Hemlock Island within 1 hr of the spill. Shoreline impacts will extend to Driest Pt to the north. Under 15-20 knot winds from S-SE Floating oil will impact Copper Pt and Hemlock Island within 90 minutes of the spill. Shoreline impacts will extend to Driest Pt to the north with scattered sheens extending 1/2 - 1 mile into Nichols Strait. Shoreline impacts will be like a bathtub ring stain along the shoreline. 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model. Under 25 knot winds 10% left after 6 hours Under 15 knot winds 10% left after 8 hours [SEP] from Sitka Public Radio http://kcaw.org/ [SEP] Tidal Heights at Metlakatla, Port Chester, Behm Canal, ALASKA Station No. 1447 Latitude: 55?? 7.70' N Longitude: 131?? 34.30' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:10 Low Water -00:07 High water height difference: (*0.95+0.0) Low water height difference: (*0.96+0.0) Based on KETCHIKAN (calculated from constituent data) From Fri Jan 30, 2009 to Sun Feb 08, 2009 (10 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Sun Feb 08, 2009; 11:20 AM; 17.1ft Lowest Tide - Sun Feb 08, 2009; 05:54 PM; -3.0ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 01/30/2009 02:46 +14.9 High Fri 08:48 +1.9 Low 14:46 +14.1 High 20:53 +0.6 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 01/31/2009 03:17 +14.9 High Sat 09:30 +1.9 Low 15:28 +13.1 High 21:27 +1.8 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 02/01/2009 03:52 +14.8 High Sun 10:19 +2.1 Low 16:18 +12.0 High 22:07 +3.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 02/02/2009 04:35 +14.5 High Mon 11:20 +2.4 Low 17:23 +10.8 High 22:57 +4.4 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 02/03/2009 05:31 +14.2 High Tue 12:37 +2.3 Low 18:51 +10.2 High ------------------------------------------------------- 02/04/2009 00:09 +5.6 Low Wed 06:45 +14.0 High 14:02 +1.7 Low 20:30 +10.4 High ------------------------------------------------------- 02/05/2009 01:42 +6.0 Low Thu 08:08 +14.4 High 15:17 +0.5 Low 21:48 +11.5 High ------------------------------------------------------- 02/06/2009 03:10 +5.3 Low Fri 09:23 +15.2 High 16:18 -0.9 Low 22:46 +12.9 High ------------------------------------------------------- 02/07/2009 04:18 +4.1 Low Sat 10:26 +16.3 High 17:09 -2.2 Low 23:33 +14.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 02/08/2009 05:13 +2.6 Low Sun 11:20 +17.1 High 17:54 -3.0 Low [SEP] Tidal Currents at Village Point, Metlakatla, 0.2 mile N of, NICHOLS PASSAGE Station No. 2886 Latitude: 55?? 8.00' N Longitude: 131?? 34.00' W From Fri Jan 30, 2009 to Sun Feb 01, 2009 (3 days) Local Standard Time CURRENT WEAK AND VARIABLE [SEP] Report from Juneau Command Post: Winds have calmed down enough (SSE 25-30 kts) to allow the captain to reboard the vessel. Turns out that the captain related the wrong amount of fuel on board; it is only 7000 gallons of diesel. The vessel is currently grounded at the bow and the two fuel tanks, each with roughly 3500 gallons, are approximately 30 feet from the point of grounding, and no fuel has yet escaped. Low tide is a 0630 AT this morning, at which point the vessel is expected to be fully agrounded. Lots of resources have been ordered to the scene including tugs and barges from Ketchikan and lots of boom for protection of sensitive areas. Plans are now to attempt to refloat the vessel this afternoon. [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (ALASKA) API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 50 knots Total Amount of Oil Released = 70,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining  Spill gal percent percent percent 2 70,000 - 18 - 4 - 77 3 70,000 26 11 63 4 70,000 - 32 - 22 - 46 5 70,000 36 33 31 6 70,000 - 39 - 43 - 19 7 70,000 40 50 10 Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (ALASKA) API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 30 knots Total Amount of Oil Released = 70,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 70,000 - 13 - 2 - 85 3 70,000 20 6 75 4 70,000 - 26 - 11 - 63 5 70,000 30 19 51 6 70,000 - 34 - 28 - 38 7 70,000 37 36 28 8 70,000 - 38 - 42 - 19 9 70,000 39 48 13 14 70,000 - 42 - 53 - 5 Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (ALASKA) API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 20 knots Total Amount of Oil Released = 70,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 70,000 - 4 - 0 - 96 2 70,000 9 1 90 4 70,000 - 20 - 5 - 75 6 70,000 29 14 57 8 70,000 - 35 - 26 - 40 10 70,000 38 36 25 12 70,000 - 40 - 44 - 16 20 70,000 47 49 4
On January 28, 2009, USCG Morgan City contacted ERD regarding an incident and requested a trajectory for a release that occurred on 1/27/09.  A pipeline that is connected to a BP platform reportedly lost 150 barrels of crude oil.  An overflight was conducted and a 5-mile x 1 mile scattered silvery sheen was observed in position 28° 12' 20" N , 088° 30' 00.  This position is approximately 50 miles offshore in the Gulf of Mexico. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Date: Jan. 28, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Mary Barber FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Slick off Miss R Delta from offshore pipeline FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A pipeline spill resulted in a visible slick yesterday. An afternoon overflight reported a 5 mile by 1 mile scattered slilvery sheen about 50 - 60 nm SSE of the Miss R Delta. Reported location was 28?? 12' 20"N by 88?? 30' 00" W. Reports estimate the amount of oil spilled at 150 bbls. As of this morning the source has been shut down. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Continue winds from the S to SE at 10 - 20 knots into Friday. Seas 2 - 5 feet. 2) Trajectory Analysis The oil will not persist long enough to make any noticeable land impacts. A spill 50 - 60 nm from shore will typically take at least a week to come close to shore and we do not expect 150 bbls to persist long enough result in any noticeable land impacts. Overnight the winds have been from the SSE at 15 - 20 knots. Surface currents appear to have been from the WSW to the ESE at about 1/3 to 3/4 knot. Any remaining oil from yesterday would be expected to have moved to the NNE to NE about 15 - 20 nm. 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model. We do not know the make up of the oil. However, small crude oil spills typically result in scattered tarballs after a few days. As mentioned above, we do not expect the oil to persist long enough to make any noticeable shoreline impact.
Rainbow sheen near West Cameron, LA Block 142 on Saturday afternoon, 24 Jan.2009. The source is thought to be a leaking underwater pipeline that has sincebeen secured. The original amount is thought to be 30 barrels of condensate buthas since been corrected to approximately 10 barrels of condensate. The reportedposition is at 29° 25’ 31” N Lat. 093° 05’ 03” W Long. A 8-mile x2-mile long rainbow sheen was observed.NRC report #895749A brief trajectory analysis and weather forecast was requested. [SEP] The USCG conducted an overflight on Saturday, 24JAN09. No sheen was evident. The RP conducted a test of the pipeline Tuesday morning, 27JAN09. No leaks were found. The USCG considers this case closed.
At 1438R, TUG MEREDITH C. REINAUER with loaded Barge RTC 150 ran aground.  The Barge hit bottom near Execution Rocks, NY.  The barge was loaded with 140,517 bbls (5,901,714 gals) of home heating oil.  The barge is taking on water, but not discharging any oil att.  The barge is double hulled. The barge is at anchor approx 1/2 nm NE of Hart Island, NY. [SEP] NOAA ESI map for the area. [SEP] File photo from Reinauer web site. [SEP] January 22, 2009 Public Affairs (212) 668-7114 Press Release Heating oil barge runs aground near Execution Rocks NEW YORK-A barge carrying more than 5 million gallons of home heating oil reportedly struck an unknown object and began taking on water near City Island, N.Y., at approximately 2:30 p.m., today. No pollution is reported at this time. The commercial tug Meredith C. Reinauer was pushing a barge to Boston, Mass., when they reportedly struck the object near Execution Rocks, N.Y. The master of the tug contacted the Coast Guard and reported the barge was taking on water in a ballasting void. The tug brought the barge to anchor off of Hart Island, N.Y. A Coast Guard 41-foot response boat crew from Coast Guard Station Kings Point was quickly on scene to confirm that the vessel was not discharging any oil. Commercial divers from Randive, Inc. were quickly on-scene and conducted an underwater survey of the barge hull. Miller Environmental Group, a commercial oil spill removal company, has placed a boom around the barge as a precautionary measure and is lightering fuel from it. The Coast Guard and Nassau County Police are currently enforcing a 200-yard safety zone around the tug and barge while lightering operations take place. "Coast Guard personnel on-scene will be monitoring this case throughout its entirety," said LT Brandon Link, Command Duty Officer at Coast Guard Sector New York. "So far no pollution has been reported, precautionary measures have been taken and we will ensure all the proper steps are taken to safely secure the cargo." The investigation into this incident is ongoing. ### For more information about the Coast Guard and Public Affairs Detachment New York you may use the following links. Facebook and Twitter Saving Lives and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] Date: Jan 22, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential spill from Barge RTC 150 FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: At 1438R, TUG MEREDITH C. REINAUER with loaded Barge RTC 150 ran aground. The Barge hit bottom near Execution Rocks, NY. The barge was loaded with 140,517 bbls (5,901,714 gals) of home heating oil. The barge is taking on water, but not discharging any oil att. The barge is double hulled. The barge is at anchor approx 1/2 nm NE of Hart Island, NY. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Tonight: Winds from W at 5 - 10 knots becoming SW later tonight Tomorrow AM: SW early, becoming S at 5 - 10 knots by 0900 Tomorrow night: 10 - 15 knots from S with gusts to 20 2) Trajectory Analysis If the oil spills tonight: Expect tidal excursions of about 2 nm for both the flood and ebb. Flood will be to the NE and Ebb to the SW. With winds tonight from the W becoming SW a spill could impact Manhasset Neck, between Barker Point and Sands Point by tomorrow morning. Then with wind becoming S, oil impacts can occur tomorrow afternoon off New Rochelle. If oil spills tomorrow morning or afternoon: With winds from the S, a spill could impact Hart Island tomorrow morning and the shoreline off New Rochelle tomorrow afternoon. Note that the type of impact and extent of impacts will depend upon how much oil was lost. Diesel will tend to from a sheen that will disperse and evaporate quickly once wind conditions get to 15 knots or more (tomorrow night). [SEP] Map [SEP] Situation: At 1438R, TUG MEREDITH C. REINAUER with loaded Barge RTC 150 ran aground. The Barge hit bottom near Execution Rocks. The barge was loaded with 140,517 bbls (5,901,714 gals) of home heating oil. The barge is taking on water, but not discharging any oil att. The barge is double hulled. The barge is at anchor approx 1/2 nm NE of Hart Island. O/S Weather: WINDS: W @ 10KTS, SEAS:3 FT Action: Sector initiated CIC. D1CC conducted conference call with Sector, LANT and HQ. STA Kings Point launched 41' and confirmed no discharge of material. The responsible party contacted Millers launch as the OSRO and Ran Dive for the dive survey. Ran Dive is currently o/s and divers are assessing damage. Millers Launch expected to be o/s at 1700R w/2 boats and 2,500ft boom. Sector NY initiated a SMIB, including a 200yd safety zone around the vessel. The safety zone is being enforced by STA Kings PT. Sector NY Duty IO, MI and FOSCR are currently enroute the scene. Aton verification has been ordered. NOAA SSC was requested to provide sensitive area information, trajectory, weather, oil fate, and tides and currents. [SEP] Situation as of 0900 1/23/09: To date there has been no release of oil from the barge. Dive survey over night discovered two 6 inch cracks, one 8 inch crack, and one 40 inch by 4 inch tear all in the starboard bow forepeak. No damage to any cargo tanks. Approximately 80,900 bbls of oil have already been lightered from the RTC 150 onto the RTC 183. Currently another 59,600 bbls are being lightered onto the barge Rockland. Once lightering operations are complete the barge RTC 150 will proceed to Mariners Harbor (Staten Island, NY) to await repairs in the dry dock. [SEP] Spot forecast for waters off new Rochelle, NY: 2119 EST, Jan 22, 2009 Sunrise/Sunset: Friday (Jan 23rd) Sunrise : 0713 EST Sunset : 1702 Saturday (Jan 24th) Sunrise : 0712 Sunset : 1703 Wind Conditions: Tonight: Winds from the W at 5 - 10 becoming SW later tonight Tomorrow morning: Wind becoming S by 0800 - 0900 at 5 -10 knots Tomorrow night: Wind increasing to 10 - 15 knots from the S with gusts to 20 knots Sea State: Tonight: 1 foot or less Tomorrow: 1 foot or less Tomorrow night: 1 -2 feet Precip: None Mostly sunny tomorrow Temps: Low tonight in the upper 20s High tomorrow in the low 40s [SEP] The barge is at anchor approx 1/2 nm NE of Hart Island: 40 50.9 N / 073 45.38 W [SEP] Tide height [SEP] Barge RTC 150 specs from the Reinauer website. [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL/HEATING OIL NO.2, CHEVRON API = 33.5 Pour Point = 5 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 12 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 36 deg F Time of Initial Release = January 22, 1800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 28,000 bbl ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill bbl percent percent percent 1 28,000 - 0 - 0 - 100 2 28,000 0 0 100 4 28,000 - 0 - 1 - 99 6 28,000 0 2 98 8 28,000 - 0 - 4 - 96 10 28,000 0 7 93 12 28,000 - 1 - 11 - 88 18 28,000 2 30 68 24 28,000 - 3 - 48 - 49 30 28,000 3 60 37 36 28,000 - 4 - 68 - 28 42 28,000 4 76 20 48 28,000 - 5 - 83 - 12
On 19 Jan. 2009 (MLK Holiday), the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a spill reported in a marsh SW of Kaplan, Louisiana.  The initial report stated that crude oil and production water (high brine content formation water) was released from a pipeline into a marsh. [SEP] Resources at Risk (RAR) Texas Petroleum Pipeline Spill, Near Kaplan, LA I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 20 January 2009 at 1000. Information in the report is based on the report of a spill in a marsh southwest of Kaplan, Louisiana. A reported 200 bbls of a mixture of crude oil and production water (high brine content formation water) was released. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers the wetlands surrounding the production area where the release occurred. Consult other ResponseLink reports for trajectory information. III. Habitats at Risk Habitats around the release site are primarily freshwater marshes and forested wetlands with some upland/developed areas. IV. Biological Resources at Risk Birds Waterfowl commonly found in area wetlands include: American coot (high concentrations), American wigeon (high concentrations), blue-winged teal, canvasback, gadwall (high concentrations), green-winged teal, hooded merganser, lesser scaup, mallard, mottled duck, northern pintail, and northern shoveler. A rare wading bird winters within 2 miles of the release site. Colonial waterbirds nest within 5 miles of the release site. Fish Fish species present in the Intracoastal Waterway and other inland waters include: Atlantic croaker (very abundant), bay anchovy (very abundant), black drum, crevalle jack, Florida pompano, gizzard shad, gray snapper, gulf menhaden, gulf sturgeon, red drum, sand seatrout, sheepshead, silver perch, southern flounder, Spanish mackerel, spot, spotted seatrout, striped mullet, and tarpon. Spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles may be present. Invertebrates Invertebrates present in the Intracoastal Waterway and other inland waters include: bay squid (spawning), blue crab, brown shrimp (spawning), Florida stone crab, gulf stone crab, pink shrimp (spawning), and white shrimp (spawning). Reptiles and Terrestrial Mammals American alligators, raccoons, mink, muskrats, river otters, and nutria are present in wetlands. V. Human-Use Resources at Risk The spill site is within the White Lake Wetlands Conservation Area managed by Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries and the Amoco Gueydan Mini-Refuge. The Flying J/Broussard Mini-Refuge occurs south of the release site. [SEP] (image credit, google) NOTE, THE ACTUAL OBSERVED SPILL LOCATION IS 7000 FEET WNW FROM THIS POSITION ON THE N SIDE OF THE ICW. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] (image credit, google) NOTE, THE REPORTED LOCATION WAS OFF BY 7000 FEET. SEE NEW MAPS. [SEP] Part of ESI Map 131 (credit, NOAA). NOTE, THE REPORTED LOCATION WAS OFF BY 7000 FEET. SEE NEW MAPS. [SEP] The initial spill location was off by 7000 feet, not much, but enough to make a big difference in resources at risk. Based on imagery available, the observed pipeline spill location appears to be within a marsh adjacent to an oil production area, N of the ICW and just over10 miles SW of Kaplan, Louisiana. The spill site is within the White Lake Wetlands Conservation Area managed by Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries and within an area identified as the AMOCO GUEYDAN MINI-REFUGE. This area is highly sensitive by designation as a refuge and the wildlife it supports. In general, all wetlands and marshes are considered sensitive habitat. This area has the added protection of state refuge status. The USCG team on-scene reports that the OSRO is deploying boom to contain a portion of the release, delineating the spill area, and working to contain the spill in as small an area as possible. The SSC has been in communication with the field team several times this afternoon, and will follow up again tomorrow. New maps have been added to Hotline. [SEP] Based on imagery available, the pipeline spill location appears to be within an agricultural rice field, just S of the ICW and just over 10 miles SW of Kaplan, Louisiana. Just to the W of this location is a freshwater marsh area that would be a holding site for waterfowl. The spill location appears to be just inside of the White Lake Wetlands Conservation Area managed by Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries. It is not clear if the agriculture land is owned by the state, but it does appear within the management area given the resolution of LDWF on-line site map. Attached are several maps that provide some highlights of the natural features in the area. From a natural resources at risk prospective, the threat to migratory waterfowl would probably be the greatest immediate threat issue. Ideally, the spilled oil and production water is trapped within water control structures and can be contained. Bird hazing would probably be required to reduce the threat to migratory waterfowl, but some level on on-scene assessment is needed. [SEP] Part of ESI Map 131 is shown indicating spill location (image credit, noaa). [SEP] Wx (Spot Forecast for Spill Area) Tonight (19 Jan.): A Canadian Cold Front will travel S and E across central Louisiana today. Sustained wind speeds around 25 mph are possible with higher gusts. Winds will decrease in the evening hours. Partly cloudy with a low around 37??F. N wind between 10 and 15 mph. Tuesday: Mostly sunny with a high near 56??F. N wind between 10 and 15 mph with gusts as high as 20 mph. Tuesday night expect partly cloudy skies with a low around 32??F. NW wind between 5 and 10 mph. Wednesday: Mostly sunny with a high near 57??F. E wind at 5 to 10 mph becoming south. Wednesday night expect partly cloudy skies with a low around 45??F. S wind around 10 mph. [SEP] On 19 Jan. 2009 (MLK Holiday), the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a spill reported in a marsh SW of Kaplan, Louisiana. The initial report stated that crude oil and production water (high brine content formation water) was released from a pipeline into a marsh. A Pollution Investigation Team from USCG Marine Safety Unit Margan City is in route to the location, and the SSC briefed them on the location and potential waterfowl concerns. The initial support requested was to highlight the sensitivity of the area. The NRC reported that 200 bbls was released (of which 30 bbls is thought to be oil. An Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) has been activated. The NOAA SSC is awaiting additional information from the field to validate the location and characterize pollution spread.
On Sunday, January 18, the 800-foot bulk carrier CSL Argosy ran aground in the Chesapeake Bay in the lower Craig Hill Channel just north of Annapolis, MD.  The ship, with pilot aboard, was inbound to Baltimore with a cargo of iron ore when it ran aground.  There was no pollution associated with the grounding, although as a precautionary measure, oil spill recovery equipment had been placed on stand-by in the event it was needed. On Monday, January 19, the vessel was refloated after a total of 19,300 metric tons of iron ore were removed and transferred to barges.  The ship is safey anchored near Annapolis, MD. while the crew manually inspects all areas of the ship.  At this time there is no signs of damage or pollution.  Cause of grounding in under investigation.  No NOAA products/support requested.
On the evening of 16 Jan. 2009, the USCG notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of an allision of the OSV C-ROVER with a MODU in the general area of the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary (FGBNMS). While completing transfer operations of synthetic-based drilling mud, the C-ROVER hit Column No. 4 on the Semi-Submersible MODU. The reported position was 27° 22.9’ N Lat. 094° 38.99’ W Long. (S of the FGBNMS). [SEP] The reported location is some 100 miles offshore and S of the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary. Synthetic-Based drilling mud is very heavy (much denser than seawater) and will immediately sink when spilled. Such products generally do not create a significant surface sheen. Given that the NOAA chart shown that this area is very deep, maybe 275 fathoms or 1650 feet, a release of 1000 gallons of drilling mud would have settled over the bottom as a light sprinkling. The worse case discharge, if discharged very rapidly, may generate a small seafloor lump smothering anything under it. We have no information as to what the present oceanographic currents are with depth at this location???€? subsurface current flow would disperse any released drilling mud more widely, but neither a 1000 gallon of 45,000 gallon release is thought to represent a significant environmental issue at this location based on this initial assessment. Most environmental tox data indicates that synthetic-based drilling mud formulations are much less toxic than traditional oil based products. [SEP] (Updated and Final Trajectory Analysis) Situation: An allission and hose separation during a transfer operation may have resulted in the loss of some diesel fuel. The max. worse case is estimated at 1,700 gallons of diesel fuel (the residual in the tank). The location of the release is more than 100 miles offshore and S of the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary (FGBNMS). The TABS buoy at the Flower Gardens is indicating NE winds at 10 to 15 kts, which is in sync with the general offshore marine forecast. Any small release of diesel would be expected to dissipate rather quickly given the on-scene conditions. If the damaged OSV is releasing fuel in route to Freeport TX, small amounts of diesel released would not persist, but rather evaporate and naturally disperse. We would not want such a condition as the vessel enters nearshore waters and the port if it can be avoided safely (the vessel was not reported to be sheening). The winds were onshore on Sat. at Freeport, TX. It appears that the damage was only to a mostly empty (the #4 STBD) below the water line. As a result, the residual would be trapped in the tank. From what has been reported, there are no reported releases or observed sheens. Any release at the time of the separation would move to the SW and not persist given the sea state conditions on-scene. The offshore facility is also reporting no release. At present, there is little current, but 10 to 15 kt winds that would have transport any pollution to the SW, but the sheen would not have persisted very long. The fate of the unknown, but probably small, volume of diesel would have been evaporation and natural dispersion. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] The attached photograph is of the Platform or MODU, OCEAN VALIANT taken during the USCG overflight the following morning. There is an OSV at the platform, but this is not the C-ROVER (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] Update and Final Report The field information has changed once again, but the following is based on direct USCG investigation rather than the information that was passed third party to the USCG. First, the product in the tank was, in fact, diesel. The initial trajectory analysis would therefore be valid. Second, there is specific information as to the actual volumes: the capacity of the Number 4 STBD Tank was 46,000 gallons. It received 41,729 gallons for transport offshore. Approximately 40,000 gallons had been transferred when the incident occurred. The separation after the allision was reported to have result in very little loss of product to the Gulf of Mexico. The hole in the vessel???€?s tank was below the waterline, which probably trapped most of the residual diesel fuel in that tank. A realistic worse case discharge would probably be around 1700 gallons, and the actual loss significantly less based on the reported information. The net result doesn???€?t change (but it is most probable that the poor communications from the RP have the USCG fired up). A USCG overflight on 17 Jan. confirmed that there was no observable damage to the MODU and that no pollution was observed in the area. Investigators report that the damage to the vessel hull consists of a 10 x ?? inch puncture 10 feet below the waterline. The incident may have been caused by the failure of a bow thruster causing the OSV to lose position. For the record, the Scientific Support Coordinator will update the initial trajectory, but this response is essentially completed from a NOAA support prospective. [SEP] On the evening of 16 Jan. 2009, the USCG notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of an allision of the OSV C-ROVER with a MODU in the general area of the Flower Gardens National Marine Sanctuary (FGNMS). While completing transfer operations of synthetic-based drilling mud, the C-ROVER hit Column No. 4 on the Semi-Submersible MODU OCEAN VALIANT. The reported position was 27?? 22.9???€? N Lat. 094?? 38.99???€? W Long. (or in East Breaks Block 599). This position is well south of the Flower Garden Banks boundary. Per information provided by the Commanding Officer of USCG Marine Safety Unit Galveston, the damage to the OSV is reported to be restricted to the No. 4 starboard tank below the waterline. The OSV reports only synthetic mud residue was in the damaged tank at the time of the allision and no sheen was observed on the water (note, any released synthetic drilling mud may not have generated a surface sheen). All other tanks and voids have been sounded and there was no report of damage to any other tank. Soundings will be continued on an hourly basis. At this point (Friday night), the vessel???€?s master reports conducting internal water transfers for stability and the breached No. 4 tank is now filled with seawater. The starboard No. 4 tank was reported to be carrying approximately 41K gallons of synthetic drilling mud of which some 40K had been offloaded to the MODU before the incident. This would mean there was a potential for approximately 1,000 gallons to have released. Additionally, the transfer hose was reported split at the knuckle after the transfer was completed with little to no loss of product. The USCG also states that this is the initial report and they will quantify all oil and other materials onboard both OSV and MODU during their on-going investigation. The C-ROVER is a U.S. flagged, 221.6 FT, 2092 GT OSV constructed in 1999 and operated by Edison Chouest Offshore. The Diamond Offshore semi-submersible MODU OCEAN VALIANT (Marshall Island; 27,149 GT; Built 1986) reports damage to the anchor fairlead on the No. 4 column. The Offshore Installation Manager reports no water intrusion. An external damage assessment will be conducted at first light and internal exams will be conducted at least every two hours to check for water intrusion. No other problems are known. Current Plans (per communications from USCG) include: USCG Cutter HERON to escort OSV C-ROVER into Port Freeport; MSU Galveston inspectors and investigating officer to meet OSV upon arrival; Airstation Corpus Christi to conduct overflight on Saturday morning; Marine Safety Unit Galveston to obtain report of damage survey from MODU OCEAN VALIANT; and NOAA SSC requested to provide trajectory analysis of worst case discharge and most likely discharge (approximately 1000 gallons of drilling mud). [SEP] Initial General Trajectory Analysis (Based on Diesel Threat) NOTE: This report is not valid, but was maintained in the record since it was submitted to the USCG when the reported threat was thought to be diesel fuel. Later it was learned that the threat was synthetic-based drilling mud. In response to your request, I have investigated possible trajectory concerns relative to the allision of the OSV C ROVER allision and an offshore oil production facility. If I plotted the position correctly, the incident happened more than 100 miles offshore in the general area of the Flower Garden National Marine Sanctuary (my rough maps at home are not that precise). The TABS buoy at the Flower Gardens is indicating NE winds at 10 to 15 kts, which is in sync with the general offshore marine forecast. Any small release of diesel would be expected to dissipate rather quickly given the on-scene conditions. If the damaged OSV is releasing fuel in route to Freeport TX, small amounts of diesel released would not persist, but rather evaporate and naturally disperse. We would not want such a condition as it enters nearshore waters and
Sector Anchorage notified the NOAA SSC at 0615, Thursday morning, that the Ocean Marine Services, Inc. workboat, the M/V Monarch, had become pinned against the leg of the Granite Pt. platform, as the combined result of a strong flood tidal current and extreme ice. The vessel has about 38,000 gallons of diesel onboard, is currently listing at around 30 degrees, and has been successfully abandoned. In addition, the Granite Pt. platform has been shut-in and abandoned, as the result of concern for possible damage to the platform. It appears that SSC may be headed on-scene. The CG and the SSC headed on-scene via a CG C-130 which overflew the Granite Pt. platform and the overturned Monarch hull just barely showing above the surface of the water. A couple of hours later it was reported that the Monarch had sunk to the seafloor in rougly 80 to 90 feet of water. Due to the ice and strong currents, it was decided to attempt a salvage operation in the spring. However, in March it was announced that the Monarch would be left on the bottom of Cook Inlet adjacent to the Granite Pt. platform. [SEP] Thursday Evening report: Sector Anchorage notified the NOAA SSC at 0615, Thursday morning, that the oil field workboat, the M/V Monarch (roughly 150 feet long), had become pinned against the leg of the Granite Pt. platform, as the combined result of a strong flood tidal current and extreme ice conditions. The vessel has about 38,000 gallons of diesel onboard After listing at around 30 degrees up against the platform for several hours, the vessel completely sank shortly after noon. In the process the vessel was completely abandoned, and the platform was shut-in and abandoned as a precaution against possible damage and oil release to the environment. Shortly after noon on Thursday, the vessel completely sank in the turbid waters of Cook Inlet in roughly 60 feet of water. At this point the response transitioned from one of pollution to one of salvage. At this point nodoby knows exactly where the vessel is. If it was neutrally buoy, it could be carried for a considerable distance by the strong Cook Inlet tidal currents, before coming to rest on the seafloor. Placing a marker buoy on the vessel was futile as the extensive ice would only destroy such a device. The platform was re-occupied Thursday afternoon and is in the process of being evaluated for damage and is being re-started. The responsible party has committed to attempting a salvage effort to raise and remove the fuel from the Monarch, and is in the process of developing a plan and finding the resources necessary to carry out such a plan. A side scan sonar survey will be necessary, divers have been contacted, and heavy equipment is being arranged. All this will take several days to orchestrate and carry out. Over twenty years of experience dealing with accidents and vessels and platforms in this portion of Cook Inlet tells me that this is going to be an extremely difficult operation, very time and labor intensive, and that ultimately may not succeed. As a result, the CG released me from an on-scene presence, to a stand-by status back home in Anchorage, in order to take care of a medical emergency with my wife. In addition, I have also learned, over the years, that the fate of much greater amounts of diesel than what are on board the Monarch, is extremely transient (on the order of hours) in this high energy, turbulent portion of Cook Inlet, particular in the presence of a large amounts of ice. Status reports will continue on a regular basis. [SEP] M/V MONARCH, GRANITE PT PLATFORM, UPPER COOK INLET, AK 0930 AST, Thursday January 15, 2009 Sunset (01/15): 1623 Sunrise (01/16): 0954 Sunset (01/16): 1625 Forecast: Today: winds expected to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the E-NE at 15-20 knots increasing overnight. Friday: winds are predicted to be from the NE at 30-40 knots. Friday night: winds are expected to be variable 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds are forecast to be from the NE at 20-25 knots. Saturday night: winds are predicted to be from the NE at 20-25 knots. Sunday: winds expected to be from the W at 15-20 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers. Tonight: rain and snow showers. Friday: rain showers. Friday night: rain showers. Saturday: rain and snow showers. Saturday night: rain and snow showers. Sunday: rain and snow showers. Seas: Today: seas 4-6 feet in ice free waters. Tonight: seas 4-6 feet in ice free waters. Friday: seas 8-10 feet in ice free waters. Friday night: 8-10 feet in ice free waters. Saturday: seas 5-7 feet in ice free waters. Saturday night: 5-7 feet in ice free waters. Sunday: seas 5-7 feet in ice free waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the mid 40's and low in the mid 30???€?s. [SEP] Tidal current SHIO record for Jan. 17-19 [SEP] This entry is meant to show the window of opportunity for the MV Monarch salvage effort. The neap tide for Cook Inlet will be occurring Jan. 20-22, with a roughly 50% decrease in current speed. This condition won't recur for another 14 days. [SEP] from http://www.seatrax.com/images/granite.jpg [SEP] Friday Evening Report, Jan. 16: 1. Today was characterized mostly by attempts to locate the M/V Monarch somewhere on the bottom of Upper Cook Inlet. Both the CGC Hickory and the CISPRI M/V Champion were able to tow side scan sonar devices. Between the vessels, a total of 4 hours of data was achieved prior to the SSS units malfunctioning. No sign of the Monarch was detected. The SSS hopefully will be repaired tomorrow for additional surveying by the M/V Champion and the Tug Vigilant. The Hickory has been released. 2. Overflight conducted; no oil or sheen or any debris observed on the water. 3. If on the small chance that a large amount of diesel or other oil is released, a response contingency plan was developed that would immediately divert the Vigilant and the Champion into skimming mode. The Unified Command would have to declare the surface oiling to amount to a significant recoverable quantity to commence such a plan. 4. RP has contracted with Global Diving and Salvage, and they are currently preparing a savage plan and making efforts to locate a suitable dive and salvage plaform. The primary objective of the salvors is locating the vessel and securing it in place to prevent possible damage to oil platforms and sub-sea pipelines. The contracted spill response contractor, Chadux currently has personnel at the command center in Nikiski. John Whitney, SSC On-call for consultation in Anchorage Jordan Stout SSC on-call for on-scene NOAA representation [SEP] Map [SEP] Sunday evening report, Jan. 18: 1. On 17JAN the M/V CHAMPION, using side scan sonar, located the M/V MONARCH approximately three meters from the SW leg of the Granite Point Platform. The current plans are to mark the vessel with a transponder and monitor it for eventual mobility. Salvage personnel are awaiting additional sonar equipment to further characterize the vessel's disposition and will perform daily monitoring for movement. The RP is still putting a salvage plan together. The plan for tomorrow is to equip the CHAMPION with spill response equipment and qualified technicians to stand by in case of a spill event. 2. The Command Post moved from the CISPRI headquarters in Nikiski to the Merritt Inn in Kenai. 3. Arrangments have been made with the NWS Anchorage for a SPOT weather forecast for the location of the sunken M/V Monarch as the salvage effort to raise vessel begins to get underway. Arrangements were also made with personnel on the Granite Point Platform to provide on-scene weather reports to the Anchorage NWS. 4. The NOAA SSC spoke directly the USFWS regarding clarification of and more details about the RAR that they have specified. Turns out that the Stellar???€?s Eider and the sea otters are further south in Cook Inlet than the Monarch incident. However, the Pribilof rock sand pipers are possibly going to be foraging on the mudflats in Trading Bay, only 5 to 10 miles SW of the incident. If there is an instantaneous large release during the salvage activity, USFWS has requested that they be immediately notified in order to charter a flight and check out this exclusive population of this bird species. NOAA Hazmat personnel have discussed a possible shorefall in Trading Bay, and feel that it is a fairly low possibility both from a trajectory and oil fate point of view. John Whitney, NOAA Alaska SSC [SEP] At 1000 this morning, Sat., Jan. 17, the CG and RP announced that the M/V Monarch hull wasd located on the bottom of Upper Cook Inlet 100 meters SW of the Granite Point platform. With experience divers and salvors on-scene, plans are being enthusiastically developed to raise and salvage the vessel, hopefully in the next couple of
On January 6, 2009, Sector Anchorage notified the NOAA SSC  of a potential incident in which a fiberglass 38' F/V American Way had engine problems enroute on a supply cruise between the villages of Kodiak  and Chignik, on the Alaskan Peninsula. and was intentionally grounded on Aghiyuk Island, SW of Kodiak Island.   The vessel had 650 gallons of diesel fuel in tanks and 4 drums of diesel on board.  After grounding, the 2-man crew abandoned the vessel and was rescued by the CG and taken to Chignik.   Aghiyuk Island is part of the Alaska Maritime NWR.   The CG requested weather and possible oil fate should any release occur.    Due to bad weather an initial CG overflight was unable to obtain any clear view or photos of the vessels.    In order to assess the condition and situation of the vessel, the CG hired Magone Marine out of Dutch Harbor.   Due to distance, however, their ETA was some time on Jan. 8.    Over the next several weeks, bad weather hampered Magone's efforts to get on-scene, and he was successful only a couple of times, until finally it was confirmed that the vessel had sunk. [SEP] Tidal heights - Jan. 8 through Jan. 14 [SEP] Thursday morning, Jan. 8, meeting with FOSC Capt Mark Hamilton and his staff: Capt. Hamilton had just returned to Anchorage from 5-6 days in the lower-48, and initially was fully briefed on the details of the incident. New information as of today included arrivial of Magone on-scene early this morning, after picking up the Master in Chignik, to assess the situation and provide Sector Anchorage with a salvage plan later on today. Good tidal height information (see next posting) was provided by NOAA in order to correlate the disposition of the vessel in the Jan. 7 photos (around 1100 to 1300 on Jan. 7) with the tidal conditions that occurred during the vessel???€?s initial grounding on Sun., Jan. 4 at around 1600 to 1800. It was concluded that in the Jan. 7 photos the vessel is most likely in its same position as when it initially grounded, and even though the photos show it partially submerged, it is also probably still partially grounded. Sector Anchorage personnel will attempt to get further information from the Master regarding status of the fuel drums on the vessel, fishing gear aboard the vessel, the Masters assessment of whether he thinks the vessel has moved, and attempt to further flush out how confident he is that no rats were onboard the vessel when it grounded. The latter issue is of extreme importance to USFWS and the Alaska Maritime NWR folks as this island is extremely rich in bird diversity and numbers during spring and summer. [SEP] Sector Anchorage notified the NOAA SSC on January 6 of a potential incident in which a fiberglass 38' F/V American Way had engine problems enroute on a supply cruise between the villages of Kodiak and Chignik, on the Alaskan Peninsula. and was intentionally grounded on Aghiyuk Island, SW of Kodiak Island. The vessel had 650 gallons of diesel fuel in tanks and 4 drums of diesel on board. After grounding, the 2-man crew abandoned the vessel and was rescued by the CG and taken to Chignik. Aghiyuk Island is part of the Alaska Maritime NWR. The CG requested weather and possible oil fate should any release occur. Due to bad weather an initial CG overflight was unable to obtain any clear view or photos of the vessels. In order to assess the condition and situation of the vessel, the CG hired Magone Marine out of Dutch Harbor. Due to distance, however, their ETA was some time on Jan. 8. Over the next several weeks, bad weather hampered Magone's efforts to get on-scene, and he was successful only a couple of times, until finally it was confirmed that the vessel had sunk. [SEP] Tidal Heights at Chowiet Island, Semidi Island, Alaska Peninsula, ALASKA Station No. 2229 Latitude: 56?? 3.10' N Longitude: 156?? 41.90' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water +00:15 Low Water +00:25 High water height difference: (*1.04+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.29+0.0) Based on KODIAK (calculated from constituent data) From Thu Jan 08, 2009 to Sun Jan 11, 2009 (4 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Sun Jan 11, 2009; 01:50 pm; 11.6ft Lowest Tide - Sun Jan 11, 2009; 08:50 pm; -3.0ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 01/08/2009 00:04 +6.3 High Thu 04:49 +4.5 Low 11:03 +10.5 High 18:31 -1.3 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 01/09/2009 01:02 +6.9 High Fri 05:57 +4.1 Low 12:03 +11.0 High 19:21 -2.2 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 01/10/2009 01:49 +7.6 High Sat 06:56 +3.5 Low 12:58 +11.5 High 20:07 -2.8 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 01/11/2009 02:32 +8.2 High Sun 07:50 +2.8 Low 13:50 +11.6 High 20:50 -3.0 Low [SEP] CG Aerial Photo taken on Jan. 7, 2009, overflight. [SEP] Tidal heights - Jan. 4 through Jan. 8 [SEP] ADIOS was run for two conservative scenarios: [SEP] Date: Jan. 8, 2009 To: Sector Anchorage Response Personnel Subject: Morning Forecast from NWS From: John Whitney, NOAA SSC PKZ150-090300- COASTAL WATERS SOUTH OF THE ALASKA PENINSULA SITKINAK TO CASTLE CAPE 400 AM AKST THU JAN 8 2009 ...HEAVY FREEZING SPRAY WARNING THROUGH TONIGHT... ...SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY THROUGH FRIDAY... .TODAY...NE WIND 30 KT. SEAS 10 FT. HEAVY FREEZING SPRAY. .TONIGHT...NE WIND 25 KT. SEAS 12 FT. HEAVY FREEZING SPRAY. .FRI...N WIND 15 KT. SEAS 13 FT. .FRI NIGHT...E WIND 20 KT. SEAS 12 FT. .SAT...E WIND 25 KT. SEAS 9 FT. .SUN...S WIND 25 KT. SEAS 11 FT. .MON...W WIND 25 KT. SEAS 12 FT. [SEP] Detail Map [SEP] Aghiyuk Island is within the Alaska Maritime NWR, in the Semidi Islands (rat-free).  At this time of year, there would not be high concentrations of birds (in the summer there are millions of birds here), but there would be wintering sea birds (cormorants) and sea ducks (harlequin ducks).   Potentially, two threatened species are present--sea otter and Steller's eider. [SEP] Second CG Aerial Photo taken on Jan. 7, 2009, overflight. [SEP] Here are the latest photo's of the F/V American Way. No report of sheening or barrels and just a small amount of debris. The CG plans to keep this as an open pollution case for a little longer. As flights are available and wx permits, CG will attempt to get some more over flights conducted just to be sure no sheening or drums wash up anywhere. WX forecast from entire forecast period doesn't look promising though.
USCG Sector Key West called  at approximately 1700 EST on 12/12/08 to report the F/V Santa Lucia, a 68.5 foot shrimper had grounded at 24-37.5N; 081-49.8W.  This location is about 4 miles north of Malory Square, Key West.  The closest point of land is Fleming Key at 2 miles.  The vessel is a wooden ship with fiberglass reenforcement and has 500 gallons of diesel on board.  Currently it is high and dry in one foot of water with a crack in the hull.  No pollution has been observed.
Shortly after noon (local time) on Friday, 12 Dec. 2008, NOAA was notified of a slick from an unknown source off the Louisiana Coast.  A passing aircraft reported a 0.25 x 2 mile dark slick some 4 to 5 miles offshore in the vicinity of Vermillion Block 29.  The USCG requested a trajectory analysis. [SEP] MYSTERY SHEEN, VERMILION BLOCK 29, GULF OF MEXICO 1230 CST, Friday December 12, 2008 Sunset (12/12): 1705 Sunrise (12/13): 0649 Sunset (12/13): 1705 Forecast: Today: winds are expected to be from the N at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Saturday: winds are expected to be from the SE at 15-20 knots. Saturday night: winds are forecast to be from the SE at 15-20 knots. Sunday: winds are predicted to be from the SE at 15-20 knots. Sunday night: winds are expected to be from the SE at 15-25 knots. Monday: winds are expected to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Precipitation: Today: mostly sunny. Tonight: partly cloudy. Saturday: mostly sunny. Saturday night: partly cloudy. Sunday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Sunday night: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Monday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Seas: Today: seas 2-4 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Tonight: seas 2-3 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Saturday: seas 3-5 feet, choppy in protected waters. Saturday night: seas 3-5 feet ,rough in protected waters. Sunday: seas 4-6 feet , rough in protected waters. Sunday night: seas 3-5 feet, rough in protected waters. Monday: 3-4 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the mid to upper 50's and lows near 40. [SEP] Shortly after noon (local time) on Friday, 12 Dec. 2008, NOAA was notified of a slick from an unknown source off the Louisiana Coast. A passing aircraft reported a 0.25 x 2 mile dark slick some 4 to 5 miles offshore in the vicinity of Vermillion Block 29. The USCG requested a trajectory analysis. The current transport conditions are offshore, but no source information or if this is a continuous release is known at present. After emailing the trajectory analysis, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator followed up with the USCG. They are currently working to get an overflight to assess the situation. None of the facilities in the area are reporting a problem. The source remains a mystery. [SEP] There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final (or Close Out) Report for this incident. NOAA???€?s support role was limited to remote trajectory support. [SEP] TIME: 1230 CST: December 12, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Vermilion Block 29 sheen. For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a sheen observed at Vermilion Block 29. The sheen was reported as being 2 miles by 1/4 mile in size, at location: 29??28'24"N - 092??14'10"W, about 4-5 miles offshore of Freshwater Bayou, LA. The sheen was reported as being black oil. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today: Winds from the N at 10-15 knots. Tonight: Winds from the NE at 10-15 knots. Saturday: Winds from the SE at 15-20 knots. Sunday: Winds from the SE at 15-20 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: The movement of any released oil will be dominated by the local winds, as well as slight coastal current in the region. We expect that the coastal current is perhaps 1/4 to 1/2 knots to the east at this time. With the north and northeast winds forecast for today and tonight, we expect the sheen to be moved offshore another 5 miles or so, and to the east about 4 miles. Saturday, any remaining sheen will be pushed by the winds to the west and toward shore. The stronger winds will serve to further break up the sheen. Any remaining tarballs could potentially reach shore sometime Sunday morning, probably in the vicinity of Freshwater Bayou. 3) OIL FATE: The Oil type is unknown, so we can not provide a precise assessment of the fate of the oil. However, typical crude oils from this region can be prone to emulsification under these conditions. Depending on the oil type, emulsification could begin fairly soon after release. About half of the oil will likely evaporate or disperse in a couple days, but about 40%-50% could remain as scattered tarballs or small blobs of emulsified oil. [SEP] (image credit, google)
At approximately 1:00 PM on Friday, 12 Dec. 2008, NOAA was notified of a grounded barge tow in the ICW at MM 421.  The two barges being pushed by the Tug HOUSTON are carrying 47,937 bbls of Light Cycle Oil.  The USCG requested a trajectory analysis and RAR. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] At approximately 1:00 PM on Friday, 12 Dec. 2008, NOAA was notified of a grounded barge tow in the ICW at MM 421. This position is very near where the ICW passes East Matagorda Bay and there is a hydraulic connection between the two near the reported position. The two barges being pushed by the Tug HOUSTON are carrying 47,937 bbls of Light Cycle Oil. The USCG requested a trajectory analysis and RAR. When last spoke to USCG, the Petty Officer leading the response stated that the lagging barge was apparently free. Brief Product Characterization: Light Cycle Oil, or LCO, is a mid-range crude oil distillate that is used as feedstock for further refining. LCO is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons. Its exact composition depends on the source of the crude oil from which it was produced and the refining methods used. Most of these products are characterized as combustible liquids with respect to flammability. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Tug Houston Tow Grounding, ICW near Matagorda Bay, TX I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 12 December 2008 at 1500. Information is based on the report of a grounded barge tow at MM 421 in the ICW (28?? 45. 75???€? N, Lat. 095?? 39.31???€? W Long.) with 47,937 bbls of light cycle oil onboard. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers the ICW near MM 421 and East Matagorda Bay. Consult other ResponseLink reports for oil trajectory information. III. Shoreline Resources at Risk Shoreline types along the ICW are primarily salt and brackish marshes, scarps and steep slopes in clay, sand beaches and sand scarps, spoil deposits, partially exposed bay margins, and some exposed walls and structures. Shorelines along East Matagorda Bay are primarily salt and brackish water marshes. IV. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Reddish egrets (state threatened) are present at Dressing Point Island; egrets are not nesting at this time of year. Other Birds Wintering waterfowl are common in E. Matagorda Bay. Species present on Dressing Point Island (none are nesting at this time of year) include: black-crowned night-heron, black skimmer, Caspian tern, cattle egret, great blue heron, great egret, laughing gull, roseate spoonbill, snowy egret, tricolored heron, white ibis, Forster???€?s tern, American oystercatcher, and shorebirds. Cattle, great and snowy egrets, great blue heron, olivaceous cormorant, and waterfowl winter in McNab Lake off of the ICW. Migratory songbirds are present along the ICW and Colorado River. Fish and Invertebrates Fish and invertebrates present in East Matagorda Bay include: southern flounder, mullet (spawning), sheepshead, gulf menhaden (spawning), pinfish, red drum, spotted seatrout (spawning), Atlantic croaker, oysters, and brown shrimp (spawning). Marine Mammals Bottlenose dolphins are present in E. Matagorda Bay year round. Habitats There is shoalgrass in the bay and cordgrass in the adjacent marshes. V. Human-Use Resources at Risk The Caney Creek marina is located just off of the ICW near the grounded tug. Management areas in the vicinity include: Matagorda Peninsula State Park and Big Boggy National Wildlife Refuge. There is a heliport west of Big Boggy Cut. [SEP] NOTE: The tides are running about 1 foot lower than these predictions. [SEP] TUG HOUSTON TOW GROUNDING, ICW E MATAGORDA BAY, TX 1300 CST, Friday December 12, 2008 Sunset (12/12): 1722 Sunrise (12/13): 0705 Sunset (12/13): 1722 Forecast: Today: winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the E at 10-15 knots becoming SE at 15-20 Knots after midnight. Saturday: winds are expected to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Saturday night: winds are forecast to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Sunday: winds are predicted to be from the S at 20-25 knots. Sunday night: winds are expected to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Monday: winds are expected to be from the S at 10-15 knots. Precipitation: Today: sunny. Tonight: partly cloudy. Saturday: chance of showers. Saturday night: chance of showers. Sunday: chance of showers. Sunday night: chance of showers. Monday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Seas: Today: seas 1-2 feet. Tonight: seas 2 or less. Saturday: seas 2-4 feet. Saturday night: seas 4-5 feet. Sunday: seas 4-6 feet. Sunday night: seas 4-6 feet. Monday: 3-5 feet. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the mid to upper 60's and lows near 50. [SEP] TIME: 1400 CST: December 12, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Tug Houston Grounding For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a potential release from the barges pushed by the Tug Houston. The Tug Houston was reported grounded on Friday, 12 Dec. 2008 in the ICW at MM 421. The two barges being pushed by the Tug Houston are carrying 47,937 bbls of Light Cycle Oil. That location is in the ICW, at the east end of East Matagorda Bay, near the junction of the ICW and the Caney Creek cutoff. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today: winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the E at 10-15 knots becoming SE at 15-20 Knots after midnight. Saturday: winds are expected to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Sunday: winds are predicted to be from the S at 20-25 knots. 2) TIDES: According to NOAA's real-time tide gauge at Port O'Connor, TX, the water level is currently running about 1 foot lower than the predicted tidal levels. We expect that the levels at the Tug's location will be similarly low. We expect that the levels will remain low through Saturday. There was a low tide at around 1000, and the next high tide is expected around midnight tonight. 3) TRAJECTORY: The currents in the ICW are generally weak, and we expect any released oil to primarily stay in the ICW, within a mile or so of the tug location. Today, floating oil will tend to be pushed by the wind up the canal to the west, and to the South shore of the ICW, with perhaps some making its way into East Matagorda Bay, depending on the timing of the tides. With the south winds forecast for tomorrow, floating oil will tend to be pushed to the north shore of the waterway, with some making it into Caney Creek. However, there is a connection between the ICW and East Matagorda Bay and the Gulf of Mexico near the location of the Tug. We don't know how strong the currents are in this connection, but it is likely that a fraction of any oil released could be pulled out into the Gulf during an ebb tide. 4) OIL FATE: Light Cycle Oil, or LCO, is a mid-range crude oil distillate that is used as feedstock for further refining. LCO is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons. Its exact composition depends on the source of the crude oil from which it was produced and the refining methods used. Most of these products are characterized as combustible liquids with respect to flammability. No specific information for this product was provided. We expect this oil to behave like a cross between diesel and light lube oil, so an unknown fraction should evaporate fairly readily, and the remaining oil is expected to behave like a light lube oil: fairly persistent, but not very sticky. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] The barge was refloated that same day with no report of pollution.
On the evening of 11 December 2008, NOAA was requested to provide scientific support to USCG Marine Safety Unit Galveston for a grounded tug at the mouth of Dickinson Bayou, Texas.  The TUG Sabine Pass had grounded earlier in the day, and was reported hard aground in soft mud and possibly an oyster reef.  The tug is reported to have 4000 gallons of diesel onboard. [SEP] The USCG reported that the tug was freed with any pollution reported. [SEP] (source, NOAA [SEP] On the evening of 11 December 2008, NOAA was requested to provide scientific support to USCG Marine Safety Unit Galveston for a grounded tug at the mouth of Dickerson Bayou, Texas. The Tug SABINE PASS had grounded earlier in the day, and was reported hard aground in soft mud and possibly an oyster reef. The tug is reported to have 4000 gallons of diesel onboard. No specific Lat. Long. position was known at the time of notification. [SEP] Situation: On the evening of 11 December 2008, USCG Marine Safety Unit Galveston requested NOAA Scientific Support for a grounded tug at the mouth of Dickinson Bayou, Texas. The Tug SABINE PASS had grounded earlier in the day, and was reported hard aground in soft mud and near an oyster reef. The tug is reported to have 4000 gallons of diesel onboard. Tide Analysis: At the time of grounding, the water level would have been approaching low tide. And the water level would have been significantly lower than that predicted due to the passing cold front. At the time of this analysis (roughly 12 hours later), the water level would be at near high tide, but still significantly less than predicted. The water level station at Eagle Point was recording a level nearly two feet below predicted for the evening high tide at 10:34 PM (local time). See attached water level chart for details. The next low tide and high tide for Eagle Point are 11:47 AM at -0.8 feet predicted and 11:28 PM (Friday Night) at +1.3, respectively. These tides will probably run below normal also as the wind remain out of the N. If the vessel doesn???€?t refloat tonight, this analysis will be updated after reviewing the water level trend during the evening and an updated weather forecast. Water levels during this time of year are often wind dominated: strong winds with a N component push water out and winds with a S component stack water in the small bay and bayou systems. Dickerson Bayou would also be affected by rainfall events, but the amount of precipitation was relatively minor. By Saturday, strong S wind are expected to reverse the current trend, i.e., higher than predicted tides might be expected. Weather Forecast: Overnight (tonight, 11 Dec.) the forecast is for clear skies, with a low around 39, and a N wind between 5 and 10 mph. On Friday (12 Dec.), sunny skies, a high near 60, and N wind around 5 mph becoming E is predicted increasing to between 5 and 15 mph Friday night. By Saturday, S wind between 15 and 20 mph, with gusts as high as 25 mph are predicted. Trajectory Analysis: Flood Tide Movement. Any diesel released on a rising tide would move up Dickerson Bayou. The extent of movement would be determined by the stage of the flood tide at release, but could easily extend a couple of miles (or more). Slack Tide Movement. It is unlikely that oil would be lost during slack tide conditions tonight unless the tug strikes an object such as a hard part of the reef after initially releasing from the soft mud. Any diesel released during this period would move to the S shore on the Dickerson Bayou and the immediate area of Dickerson Bay. Ebb Tide Movement. Any oil released before or during an ebb tide (falling tide) would migrate into Dickerson Bay and impact the shoreline near Skyline Drive. The rate of release (as well as total volume released) would dictate the extent of oiling and the extent of the observed slick. Since the winds are forecasted to be relatively light and out of the N switching to E, a worse case spill (4000 gallons) might extend into Galveston Bay, but would mostly strand (at least initially) along the S shore of Dickerson Bay. Initial Resources at Risk Analysis: This initial analysis covers Dickinson Bayou and Dickinson Bay. Diesel fuels are relatively nonpersistent, but can be toxic by exposure to be both surface oil and naturally dispersed oil. The shoreline of Dickinson Bay and Bayou is a mix of marshes, sheltered scarps, exposed scarps in clay, gravel beaches, exposed riprap, and seawalls. The only endangered species in the immediate area is the Atwater???€?s prairie chicken, which may be found about a mile south of Dickinson Bayou. Numerous species of fish are present in the area. Dickinson Bay is a nursery area for fish; gulf killifish, hardhead catfish, sheepshead minnow, spotted seatrout, red drum, and bay anchovy may be spawning in the bay at this time. Other larval and juvenile fish present include Atlantic croaker, southern flounder, sand seatrout, and striped mullet. Larval and juvenile life stages are the most sensitive to oil impacts. There are oyster beds at the mouth of Dickinson Bay and throughout the area of Galveston Bay in the vicinity of Dickinson Bay. Also present in the area are blue crab (larvae and juveniles), brown shrimp, and white shrimp (spawning, larvae, and juveniles). Also present in the area are numerous species of waterfowl, wading birds, terns, and rails. The American alligator may also be present, but mostly likely is a state of near hibernation due to the extreme cold weather. There is a marina and boat ramp at April Fool Point, and a marina where Highway 146 crosses Dickinson Bayou. There is a water intake for Houston L&P Robinson Plant at the mouth of Salt Bayou. Dickinson Bay is also used for recreational fishing.
On Monday night, 1 Dec. 2008, the USCG performed a rescue of the crew of a sinking shrimp boat off in the Gulf of Mexico off South Pass.  The crew was reported safe, but the abandoned fishing vessel was reported left in gear and moving at an estimated 3 knots.  On Tuesday morning at approximately 1000 hrs (local time) the vessel was spotted aground on the W side of South Pass with the engines still engaged (prop wash was observed).  The vessel was reported to have 1000 gallons of diesel onboard.  USCG Sector New Orleans has requested a trajectory analysis. [SEP] Small diesel pdf [SEP] The islands and exposed sand bars and flats in the Mississippi Delta region, as well as the adjacent waters, are highly utilized by migratory birds for resting and feeding. The reported location is immediately adjacent to the Pass A Loutre Wildlife Management Area. [SEP] The F/V Capt. Kyle (the previously unnamed shrimp boat) has been removed. The USCG reports that it is being taken to Venice, LA to be checked out, then they will make for Pascagoula, MS. No pollution was reported. Unless the situation changes, this entry will qualify as the final report. [SEP] Reported position on 2 Dec. 2008 (image credit, google). [SEP] Resources at Risk for South Pass, Mississippi Delta, LA I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 2 December 2008 at 1300. Information is based on the report of shrimp boat aground on the west side of South Pass (28?? 58. 80???€? N, Lat. 089?? 09.30???€? W Long.) with 1000 gallons of diesel onboard. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers and the Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area (WMA) at South Pass and surrounding areas. Consult other ResponseLink reports for oil trajectory information. III. Shoreline Resources at Risk Shoreline types around the west side of South Pass are primarily intermediate marsh, exposed tidal flats, and sand beach. IV. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Piper plover (federally threatened) are likely wintering on sand flats in the area. Small numbers of brown pelican (federally endangered) may be nesting in the vicinity. Gulf sturgeon (federally threatened) is rare in Gulf waters. Other Birds Large numbers of migratory birds may be found in marshes and in open water at this time of year. Species may include: lesser scaup, American coot, American wigeon, blue-winged teal, canvasback, gadwall, green-winged teal, hooded merganser, mallard, mottled duck, northern pintail, northern shoveler, ring-necked duck, Forster???€?s tern, laughing gull, royal tern, sandwich tern, black skimmer, Caspian tern, gull-billed tern, and sandwich tern. Fish Fish present in East Bay and the Gulf of Mexico at this time of year include: Atlantic croaker, bay anchovy, gulf menhaden, spot (all highly abundant); striped mullet, red drum, sheepshead (all abundant); black drum, gizzard shad, sand seatrout, silver perch, southern flounder, spotted seatrout, (all common); crevalle jack, Spanish mackerel, tarpon, and Florida pompano (all rare). All of these species, excluding the croaker, striped mullet, gizzard shad, sand seatrout, and crevalle jack, are spawning at this time of year. Invertebrates Invertebrates present in East Bay and the Gulf at this time of year include: blue crab and white shrimp (both abundant); brown shrimp, Gulf stone crab, and pink shrimp (all common); bay squid and Florida stone crab (both rare). All of these species are spawning at this time of year, excluding the bay squid. Reptiles and Terrestrial Mammals Alligators, raccoons, mink, muskrats, river otters, and nutria may be present in marshes. V. Human-Use Resources at Risk The boat is aground in the vicinity of the Pass a Loutre WMA. [SEP] Reported position on 2 Dec. 2008 (image credit, google). [SEP] NOAA Chart Map [SEP] On Monday night, 1 Dec. 2008, the USCG performed a rescue of the crew of a sinking shrimp boat off in the Gulf of Mexico off South Pass. The crew was reported safe, but the abandoned fishing vessel was reported left in gear and moving at an estimated 3 knots. On Tuesday morning at approximately 1000 hrs (local time) the vessel was spotted aground on the W side of South Pass with the engines still engaged (prop wash was observed). The vessel was reported to have 1000 gallons of diesel onboard. USCG Sector New Orleans has requested a trajectory analysis. The location of the grounding was reported as 28?? 58.80???€? N Lat. 089?? 09.30???€? W Long. This position is just on the west-side in what appears as open water. As shown from the attached map/chart images, the landforms in this area have significantly changed over the years, but the vessel is most likely aground on a shoal outside of the pass entrance. NOAA ERD???€?s Home Team is developing a weather and trajectory analysis. [SEP] SHRIMP BOAT AGROUND, SOUTH PASS, MISSISSIPPI DELTA, LA 1100 CST, Tuesday December 02, 2008 Sunset (12/02): 1700 Sunrise (12/03): 0700 Sunset (12/03): 1700 Forecast: Today: winds are expected to be from the N at 5-10 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the SW at 5-10 knots picking Up to 15 knots late in the evening. Wednesday: winds are expected to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Wednesday night: winds are forecast to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Thursday: winds are predicted to be from the SW at 10-15 knots. Thursday night: winds are expected to be from the NE at 20-25 knots. Precipitation: Today: mostly sunny. Tonight: mostly clear. Wednesday: sunny. Wednesday night: chance of showers. Thursday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Thursday night: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Seas: Today: seas 1-2 feet light chop in protected waters. Tonight: seas 1-2 feet light to moderate chop in protected waters. Wednesday: seas 3-4 feet choppy in protected waters. Wednesday night: seas 3-5 feet choppy in protected waters. Thursday: seas 2-4 feet choppy in protected waters. Thursday night: seas 4-5 feet rough in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the mid 50's and lows in the mid 40???€?s. [SEP] Reported position on 2 Dec. 2008 (image credit, google). [SEP] The map provides a quick look at the sensitivity of the area. A standard RAR product is being developed (map credit, NOAA). [SEP] Date: Dec 2, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential 1000 gallon spill from grounded shrimp boat off S. Pass FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: An abandoned shrimp boat with an estimated 1000 gallons of diesel was reported grounded off South Pass, Miss. R. Coordinates are reported to be 28 58.8'N by 089?? 09.30'W. No spill reported. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Today: winds are expected to be from the N at 5-10 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the SW at 5-10 knots picking Up to 15 knots late in the evening. Wednesday: winds are expected to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Wednesday night: winds are forecast to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Thursday: winds are predicted to be from the SW at 10-15 knots. Thursday night: winds are expected to be from the NE at 20-25 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis If oil were to spill today under 5 - 10 knot, N wind conditions: Expect a visible sheen of 1 - 2 miles to the South that would persist into tomorrow. Shoreline impacts may occur on the southwest tip of South Pass within 2 - 3 hours. If oil were to spill tonight under 10 - 15 knot winds from the S or SW: Expect a visible sheen that could impact the southwest tip of South Pass. Impacts at most would result in a bathtub ring stain. The oil would reach shoreline within 2 - 4 hours of the spill. If oil were spilled on Thursday night under NE wind conditions we not expect any shoreline impacts. A visible sheen would extend about 1 mile before dispersing and evaporating. 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model for 1000 gallon diesel spill: Under 10 knot winds from N: 90% of spill evaporated or naturally dispersed within 36 - 40 hours Under 10 knot winds from S or SW: 90% of spill evaporated or naturally dispersed within 15 - 18 hours Under 15 knot winds from S or SW: 90% of spill evaporated or naturally dispersed within 8 - 12 hours Under 20 knot winds from S or SW: 90% of spill evaporated or naturally dispersed within 4 - 6 hours Under 25 knot winds from NE : 90% of spill evaporated or naturally dispersed within 10 - 15 hours
On Monday evening, 24 Nov. 2008, NOAA’s Emergency Response Division was requested to provide a trajectory in support of a grounded vessel at the Brazos Santiago Pass Jetty near South Padre Island, TX.  The F/V MISS MARHANNA is reported to have grounded late on 22 Nov. 2008.  Heavy seas in the area have created a concern that the vessel could be further damaged and release diesel fuel in this highly sensitive area.  The vessel is reported to have 15,000 gallons of diesel onboard. [SEP] As of 25 Nov. 2008, the fishing vessel was still aground. USCG Sector Corpus Christi, Texas General Land Office (TGLO), and the USCG Strike Team are reported to be taking corrective actions to protect sensitive areas and work with the RP on a lightering and salvage plan. At lest part of the plan will probably be federalized since the USCG, under the Oil Spill Liability Trust Funding, has retained a contractor. The operation is difficult given the location of the vessel and the hazards involved due to vessel exposure to wind and weather. No details to the plan are currently known, and the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator will follow up with the USCG later today. [SEP] Date and source of the attached photograph is unknown. The USCG provided the image on 25 Nov. 2008. [SEP] TIME: 1800 CST Monday, Nov. 24, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: F/V Miss Marhanna For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a release from the grounded fishing vessel Miss Marhanna. The F/V Miss Marhanna was reported grounded at 2300 on Nov. 21st. Soon after the grounding, a small sheen was reported. It is suspected that that was probably bilge water, and the the main fuel tanks have not yet been breached. However, there is concern that the vessel could be broken up in the strong winds expected this evening and for the next couple days. The vessel has a capacity of 40,000 gal of diesel fuel, but is thought to be carrying about 15,000 gal at this time. The location is at the end of the south .jetty of Brazon Santiago Pass, at approx: 26??3.5'N--097??9.0'W. If there is an actual release, we can provide a more precise trajectory given the conditions at the time of the release. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WINDS: Tonight: Winds from the SE at 5-10 knots, increasing to 15-20 knots from the N later this evening. Tuesday: Winds from the NE at 15-20 knots. Wednesday: Winds from the SE at 15-10 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: At the mouth of the Brazon Santiago Pass entrance, the oil movement will be dominated by the winds and the tidal currents through the entrance. Unfortunately, we have found no data about the strength of tidal currents though the entrance. However, the Aransas pass to the north has currents of about 2-2.5 knots. We expect that the currents in this entrance may by up to that large. If there is a release during a ebb current, the sheen will be carried into the Gulf, away from shore by the currents, while being moved by the winds to the southwest or northeast, depending on the direction of the winds at the time of the release. A a result, the sheen will travel twards shore, and be largely broken up by the surf. there may be some stainiing of the beach within a couple miles of the entrance. The visual sheen should last less than 10 hours or so in the strong winds and waves. If there is a release during a flood current, the sheen could be carried into the pass, into the south end of Laguna Madre. Once in the lagoon, it will be moved primarily by the wind, toward the southwest or northwest, depending on the wind direction at the time of the release. There would likely be shoreline impacts on the shores of Long Island and Port Isabel. Some sheen could get drawn into the Brownsville Ship Channel and into south Bay, perhaps effecting the mudflats along the west shore. The sheen will dissipate more slowly in the lagoon than it would in the open coast, but it will still dissipate fairly rapidly in the strong winds, with the visual sheen inside the lagoon lasting up to 24 hours or so. 3) OIL FATE: Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. These oils do not generally present an involved cleanup problem. However, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and can persist as a biological threat in low energy marine environments. [SEP] On Monday evening, 24 Nov. 2008, NOAA???€?s Emergency Response Division was requested to provide a trajectory in support of a grounded vessel at the Brazos Santiago Pass Jetty near South Padre Island, TX. The F/V MISS MARHANNA is reported to have grounded on 22 Nov. 2008. The current position is reported as ???€?T-boned???€? on the outside, south jetty. The position reported in the Hotline summary is a general location only. Heavy seas in the area have created a concern that the vessel could be further damaged and release diesel fuel in this highly sensitive area. The vessel is reported to have 15,000 gallons of diesel onboard. Earlier it was reported that oil was released from the vessel and creating a sheen. This may have been slop oil from the engine compartment, or possibly a fuel tank. The NRC reported on 22 Nov. that the vessel grounded due to bad weather and released a ???€?large???€? amount of diesel fuel. Sheen size was reported as 1000 x 1500 yds. From talking with the USCG Gulf Strike Team, it is thought that this might have been bildge rather than diesel from a fuel tank. No additional information is known at present. [SEP] (see attached report) [SEP] The location shown is based on a verbal description provided by the USCG (image credit, google). [SEP] Both sections of the vessel were safely recovered on the morning of 18 Dec 2008 and delivered via barge to All Star Metals in Brownsville, TX. When the sections were removed, they were inspected and fully cleaned to mitigate the risk of pollution prior to final delivery to All Star Metals. The Owner/Operator was notified that the remains of the vessel formerly know as MISS RHIANNA were delivered to the scrap yard, and that they should contact the scrap yard with any further inquiries. No fuel was recovered. An estimated 14,000 gallons of diesel was released to the environment. The loss of diesel was during the initial grounding and break up on the jetties.
On the evening of 14 Nov. 2008, MSU Galveston notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of an oil spill near Dickerson Bayou, Cambers County, Texas.  The USCG reports that 5 bbls may have entered the adjacent ditch and maybe 1 bbl escaped into the waterway. [SEP] On the evening of 14 Nov. 2008, MSU Galveston notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of an oil spill near Dickerson Bayou, Cambers County, Texas. This is the same location of an almost identical incident from 8 Aug. 2008 (Hotline Dickerson Bayou-Canal Oil Spill, Dickerson Bay, Texas). The current release is thought to be associated with the same flowline. The USCG reports that 5 bbls may have entered the adjacent ditch and maybe 1 bbl escaped into the waterway. The RP has the oil in the ditch contained and the bayou boomed. An Oil Spill Response Organization is on-scene. After discussion of the situation with the USCG, no further support was requested. Unless the situation changes, this entry will constitute the Initial and Final Hotline Report. Note, the position reported in the NRC report is not believed to be the exact location. It is only a roughly estimated position.
On the evening of 6 Nov. 2008, USCG Sector New Orleans notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a grounded vessel in South Pass, LA.  The cause of the accident is unknown at this time as are the details of the vessel.  What is known is at 1945 hrs (local time) the M/V MISTER JACOB grounded on what was reported as a rock jetty and holed both fuel tanks.  The vessel was report to be carrying just under 10,000 gallons of diesel fuel.  NOAA was requested to provide a trajectory analysis. [SEP] On the evening of 6 Nov. 2008, USCG Sector New Orleans notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a grounded vessel in South Pass, LA. The cause of the accident is unknown at this time as are the details of the vessel. What is known is at 1945 hrs (local time) the M/V MISTER JACOB grounded on what was reported as a rock jetty and holed both fuel tanks. The vessel was report to be carrying just under 10,000 gallons of diesel fuel. NOAA was requested to provide a trajectory analysis. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator contact the Home Team to provide trajectory support. There is some concern on the reported position. The verbal report stated submerged jetties at SW Pass in the Mississippi Delta. The plotted position is several miles off S Pass. Clarification was requested, and the USCG Command Center restated the location is that provided. The position in the NRC report is very close to the the one provided by the USCG, but states SW Pass. With no other alternative, the position provided was used for the trajectory analysis. [SEP] The initial reported position was wrong... the arrow identifies the correct position. See Initial Report for details (credit, NOAA). [SEP] Date: Nov. 6, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry / USCG Lauren Sullam FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: MV/Mister Jacob grounding FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: It has been reported that the OSV, Mv?Mister Jacob went ground at 1945 CST tonight. It had a capacity of 10,000 gallons of #2 fuel oil. Both fuel tanks are reported damaged. The location is reported to be 28?? 52.52'N by 89?? 02.28'W. See attached map. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds tonight and tomorrow for the area off South Pass are expected to be 10 - 15 knots from the S. Seas are expected to be 1 - 3 feet through Friday. Wind observations from SW Pass indicate that the winds have been from the S to SSW at 7 - 8 knots tonight. 2) Trajectory Analysis A 10,000 gallon diesel spill is not expected to persist long enough to impact land that is over 8 nm away. Under the forecast conditions we would expect about 65% - 75% of the oil to evaporate and disperse into the water within 12 hours. By sunrise tomorrow expect to see scattered sheens from the source that could extend 2 - 4 nm to the NW. [SEP] 28?? 59.63'N by 089?? 8.35'W [SEP] As suspected last night, the reported position was incorrect. The USCG stated this morning that the vessel was located at approximately 28?? 59.63???€? N Lat. 89?? 08.35???€? W Long. This position places the grounded vessel at the entrance to South Pass, Mississippi Delta, Louisiana. The USCG was unable to get an overflight committed to this mission at first light. The OSRO was unable to locate the vessel last night. No additional information is known at this time. NOAA Scientific Support Home Team is developing an updated trajectory based on the new position. [SEP] Date: Nov. 7, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: MV/Mister Jacob grounding FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: See map for updated location of MV Mister Jacob. It is grounded at the entrance to South Pass at 28?? 59.63'N by 089?? 8.35'W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Overnight winds obs from SW Pass: Nov 6 (CST) 2000 - S at 7 knots 2200 - S at 8 knots Nov 7 0000 - SSW at 8 knots 0200 - SSW at 3 knots 0500 - SW at 3 knots 0800 - SW at 3 knots 1000 - SW3 knots Offshore waves heights have been 1 - 2 feet. Forecast is for W winds today becoming N later. See separate forecast. 2) Predicted Tide heights(see attached plot) Tidal Heights at SOUTH PASS, Mississippi River, LOUISIANA Latitude: 28?? 59.40' N Longitude: 89?? 8.40' W From Thu Nov 06, 2008 to Sat Nov 08, 2008 (3 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 11/06/2008 00:38 +1.5 High Thu 12:20 +0.4 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 11/07/2008 01:35 +1.3 High Fri 12:38 +0.6 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 11/08/2008 03:43 +1.1 High Sat 12:32 +0.8 Low 19:25 +1.0 High 3) Trajectory Analysis Oil that was lost last night during the first few hours of the grounding may have impacted the south facing shore around Port Eads. The extent of the shoreline impact would depend on how much oil was spilled and exactly when it was spill. Winds were from the south at 7 to 8 knots and the tide was rising until 0130 Friday morning. These two factors would result in some northward movement of the oil. Any shoreline impact would be in the form of a light bathtub ring along the beach. With the S winds becoming SSW and SW this morning and the falling tide, any oil spilled this morning would not be expected to impact shore. We would not expect oil spilled during W winds to impact shoreline. Under N wind conditions some light sheens may smear along the southern tip of South Pass as it exits the Pass into the Gulf. 3) Oil Fate from ADIOS II model After 12 hours 20 - 30% of #2 fuel oil remains After 24 hours 5 - 15% of fuel oil remains [SEP] Tide heights [SEP] M/V MISTER JACOB GROUNDING, GOM, MISSISSIPPI DELTA, LA 1100 CST, Friday November 07, 2008 Sunset (11/07): 1709 Sunrise (11/07): 0620 Sunset (11/07): 1708 Forecast: Today: winds expected to be from the W at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the N at 10-15 knots. Saturday: winds are predicted to be from the N at 10-15 knots. Saturday night: winds are expected to be from the NW at 10-15 knots. Sunday: winds are forecast to be from the N at 10-15 knots. Sunday night: winds are predicted to be from the N at 10-15 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Tonight: isolated showers and thunderstorms. Saturday: sunny. Saturday night: clear. Sunday: sunny. Sunday night: clear.  Seas: Today: seas 2-3 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Tonight: seas 3-5 feet, moderate chop in protected waters. Saturday: seas 3-5 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Saturday night: seas 2-4 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Sunday: seas 2-4 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Sunday night: seas 2-4 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the mid 70's and lows near 60. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
On Sunday evening, 2 Nov. 2008, the Tug LIL SUSAN S was reported to have grounded two barges in tow near Light 20 in Bolivar Roads, TX.  The reported cargo is “light cycle oil.”  The USCG contacted the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator at 1930 hrs the same evening and requested tidal information, natural resources at risk information, and a trajectory analysis should there be a release. [SEP] Note, there have been multiple groundings since Hurricane Ike in this area. This is likely due (at least in part) to additional shoaling caused by the hurricane. [SEP] At 2100 hrs 2 Nov. 2008, it was reported that the barges refloated on the rising tide. No pollution was reported. This entry constitutes a final report for the incident. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] On Sunday evening, 2 Nov. 2008, the Tug LIL SUSAN S was reported to have grounded two barges in tow near Light 20 in Bolivar Roads, TX. The reported cargo is ???€?light cycle oil.???€? The USCG contacted the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator at 1930 hrs the same evening and requested tidal information, natural resources at risk information, and a trajectory analysis should there be a release. The reported position of the barge was 29?? 22.338' N Lat. 094?? 47.022' W Long. The volume of cargo is unknown at present. [SEP] (credit, noaa) [SEP] Brief Wx Summary: Sunday Night, 2 Nov.: Mostly clear, with a low around 66 and E wind between 5 and 10 mph. Monday: Mostly sunny, with a high near 76 and E wind between 5 and 10 mph. Monday Night: Partly cloudy, with a low around 67 and E wind around 10 mph. Tuesday (Election Day): Mostly sunny, with a high near 80 and SE wind around 10 mph. Tuesday Night: Partly cloudy, with a low around 69 and SE wind around 10 mph. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] (credit, NOAA) [SEP] Light Cycle Oil, or LCO, is a mid-range crude oil distillate that is used as feedstock for further refining. LCO is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons. Its exact composition depends on the source of the crude oil from which it was produced and the refining methods used. Most of these products are characterized as combustible liquids with respect to flammability. No specific information for this product was provided. [SEP] The winds have been out of the E or SE at 6 to 8 mph at Scholes Field, Galveston. These wind conditions are expected to continue for the next couple of days with E-SE winds at 5 to 10 mph forecasted. The observed water levels appear to track closely with the predicted values. The next high tide at the entrance to Galveston Bay is predicted for 2302 hrs (local time), and is expected to be a +1.9 foot high tide. It is likely that the tow would be free shortly before this time. Should there be a release at high tide, oil would initially be blown to the W-NW. The winds are not expected to be very strong, therefore, the oil would not move far until the ebb tidal cycle begins. The next low tide is predicted for around noon, 1200 hrs, on 3 Nov. The max outflow tidal current would be expected slightly before sunrise Monday morning.
On Friday, 31 October 2008 (Halloween), NOAA was notified by USCG MSU Galveston of a red-flag barge and tug grounding in Chocolate Bayou, TX.  The barge is reported to be carrying 10,000 bbls of Butylene, a liquefied gas. [SEP] The USCG observer reported that there did not appear to be any type of leak coming from the barge. The photographs show two tugs actively attempting to free the barge from it's grounding just before sunset. Photographs were taken Friday evening, 31 Oct. 2008 (credit, USCG). [SEP] The USCG observer reported that there did not appear to be any type of leak coming from the barge. The photographs show two tugs actively attempting to free the barge from it's grounding just before sunset. Photographs were taken Friday evening, 31 Oct. 2008 (credit, USCG). [SEP] Enclosed are the tidal heights at the nearest station: Alligator Point, which is at the mouth of the Chocolate Bay, West Bay. The tides are pretty consistent for the next few days, with a primarily diurnal pattern, and a range of about 1 foot. About six miles up the Bayou at the location of the barge, we expect the tidal fluctuation to be perhaps a 1/2 a foot, and lag by about 1/2 hour. Tidal currents are expected to be small. [SEP] Butylene is an easily liquefied colorless gas boiling from 20.7 to 38??F. Insoluble in water. Contact with the unconfined liquid can cause frostbite by evaporative cooling. Any leak can be either liquid or vapor. Can asphyxiate by the displacement of air. Under prolonged exposure to intense heat containers may rupture violently and rocket. Highly flammable - Vapor is heavier than air and may travel long distance to a source of ignition and flash back. May act as an asphyxiant or slight anesthetic at high vapor concentrations especially in enclosed (or confined) spaces. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] On Friday, 31 October 2008 (Halloween), NOAA was notified by USCG MSU Galveston of a red-flag barge and tug grounding in Chocolate Bayou, TX. The barge is reported to be carrying 10,000 bbls of Butylene, a liquefied gas. Initially the barge was reported to carrying Raffinate, a light petroleum distillate sometimes call ???€?sweet naphtha.???€? NOAA was in process of providing tide, potential trajectory, and natural resources at risk support. Because Butylene will immediately evaporate, the greatest threat would be a potential fire-explosion situation. [SEP] The USCG observer reported that there did not appear to be any type of leak coming from the barge. The photographs show two tugs actively attempting to free the barge from it's grounding just before sunset. Photographs were taken Friday evening, 31 Oct. 2008 (credit, USCG). [SEP] I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 31 October 2008 at 1300. Information in the report is based on the report of a UTV and barge aground in Chocolate Bayou (29?? 12???€? 59.26???€? N, Lat. 095?? 12???€? 48.13???€? W Long.). The barge is loaded with 10,000 bbls of butylene, a liquefied gas. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers Chocolate Bayou and surrounding areas. Consult other ResponseLink reports for oil trajectory information. III. Shoreline Resources at Risk Shoreline types around Chocolate Bayou are primarily sheltered scarps and salt and brackish water marshes. Bulrush, common reed, and other rushes are typical vegetation along the bayou shoreline. IV. Biological Resources at Risk Birds Birds commonly found in the area at this time of year include: clapper rail, Forster???€?s tern, gulls, and wading birds. Fish Fish species present in Chocolate Bayou include: red drum (spawning), bay anchovy (spawning), gulf menhaden (spawning), spotted seatrout (spawning), gizzard shad, and southern flounder. Invertebrates Species present in Chocolate Bayou include: oysters, blue crab, brown shrimp (spawning), and white shrimp (spawning). Reptiles and Amphibians Diamondback terrapin utilize marshes and shorelines in the bayou and along Chocolate Bay. V. Human-Use Resources at Risk The Brazoria NWR is located south of the release site. There is an Amoco Chemicals Co. water intake in the bayou and two boat ramps. [SEP] RAFFINATE BARGE AGROUND, CHOCOLATE BAYOU, TX 1130 CDT, Friday October 31, 2008 Sunset (10/31): 1833 Sunrise (11/01): 0733 Sunset (11/01): 1833 Forecast: Today: winds expected to be from the E at 7-10 knots becoming SE at 5-10 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the SE at 7-10 knots. Saturday: winds are predicted to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Saturday night: winds are expected to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Sunday: winds are forecast to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Sunday night: winds are predicted to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: sunny. Tonight: clear. Saturday: sunny. Saturday night: clear. Sunday: sunny. Sunday night: clear. Seas: Bay waters Today: seas smooth to slightly choppy. Tonight: seas smooth. Saturday: seas smooth. Saturday night: seas smooth. Sunday: seas smooth. Sunday night: seas smooth. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the upper 70???€?s and lows near 60. [SEP] Detailed NOAA chart [SEP] The USCG observer reported that there did not appear to be any type of leak coming from the barge. The photographs show two tugs actively attempting to free the barge from it's grounding just before sunset. Photographs were taken Friday evening, 31 Oct. 2008 (credit, USCG).
On Friday afternoon, 24 Oct. 2008, the Home Team in Seattle WA was notified of a small mystery spill in the Gulf of Mexico.  A 700 yd. by 70 yd. rainbow sheen was reported at 1418 (local time) at location:  29°32'0"N--092°25'06"W. That location is S of White Lake LA, about 1.5 miles offshore, and about 25 miles west of Marsh Island.  A trajectory was requested. [SEP] TIME: 1530 CDT Friday, October 24, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery sheen south of White Lake For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of an observed sheen offshore, south of White Lake, LA. A 700 yd. by 70 yd. rainbow sheen was reported at 1418 today at location: 29??32'0"N--092??25'06"W. That location is south of White Lake, LA, about 1.5 miles offshore, and about about 25 miles west of Marsh Island. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today: Offshore winds at 5 to 10 knots. Tonight: Light and variable, with a northeast trend. Saturday: Light and variable, with a northeast trend. Saturday night: East winds 5 to 10 knots. Seas 2 feet. Sunday: Northeast winds 5 to 10 knots becoming east in the afternoon. Monday: Northeast winds 20 to 25 knots. Seas 6 to 8 feet. 2) TRAJECTORY: We do not expect any shoreline impacts. In that region, the movement of the oil will be dominated by the wind, with some slight influence by a coastal current, which is expected to be small to the west. The winds are forecast to be light for the next couple days, with low probability of a southern wind. The generally northeast winds and current to the west will tend to move the sheen slightly offshore and a couple miles to the west in the next day or so. If there is any sheen left by Monday, it will be quickly dissipated when the winds pick up. 3) OIL FATE: Without any information about the product, we can not accurately predict its fate. However, a rainbow sheen of that size, with the very light wind conditions expected, is likely to dissipate within a day or so. If it is a more persistent product than expected, it could last a bit longer, but will be well dispersed when the winds pick up on Monday. [SEP] On Friday afternoon, 24 Oct. 2008, the Home Team in Seattle WA was notified of a small mystery spill in the Gulf of Mexico. A 700 yd. by 70 yd. rainbow sheen was reported at 1418 (local time) at location: 29??32'0"N--092??25'06"W. That location is S of White Lake LA, about 1.5 miles offshore, and about 25 miles west of Marsh Island. A trajectory was requested. The trajectory analysis and a follow up conversation were conducted with the USCG Pollution Investigator. No additional information was provided. It is assumed that the small slick dissipated naturally.
On the morning of 19 October 2008, USCG MSU Galveston responded to a barge hard aground at MM 351/Buoy No. 5, which is near Pelican Cut on the ICW. The barge is carrying 23,000 gallons of Cumene. The grounded barge is not blocking the channel. The USCG has requested a salvage plan from the RP and a trajectory analysis from NOAA. The salvage plan my include lightering the barge before attempting to refloat. [SEP] (credit, NOAA) [SEP] GNOME generated movie for a high tide release. [SEP] The barge was refloated Saturday evening and the USCG will now be conducting a damage survey. There is no report of structural damage to the barge or pollution released. This report constitutes the final report. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] 1993 CUMENE SPILL (CASE STUDY AS INFORMATION ONLY) At 0003 March 31, 1993, the USCG MSO Philadelphia was notified by Tioga Marine Terminal of an acetone-like odor in the area. At the time of the incident there were partly cloudy skies, winds east 5 to 10 knots, and a temperature of 60??F. MSO personnel estimated that between 32,000 to 600,000 gallons of cumene had been released from the M/V Ellen Knutsen into the Delaware River. The 442-foot Ellen Knutsen was docked at the GATX terminal in Port Richmond, Pennsylvania just south of the Betsy Ross Bridge on the Delaware River. The source of the release was a two-inch crack between the #5 starboard segregated ballast tank and the #10 starboard cargo tank. This crack permitted cargo to leak into the adjacent ballast tank. The ballast cumene mixture discharged into the river during deballasting. The spill spread downstream as far as Camden, New Jersey and upstream to near the Tacony-Palmyra Bridge. GATX personnel stopped transfer operations as soon as the spill was discovered. The total estimated release was 16,000 gallons. The Philadelphia Fire Department Hazardous Materials (HAZMAT) Team, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for regions II and III, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, and USCG AST were onscene. Air monitoring revealed levels below two ppm at the dock and zero on the water. Behavior of Spilled Material: The product was a colorless, alkylated benzene liquid that produced a sheen in areas of heavy concentrations. The cumene moved with the flow of the river and tide and the odor of the material was detected several miles from the source. Although cumene is not very soluble in water and only a localized fish kill might be expected, it is highly toxic to birds. The spill???€?s proximity to downtown Philadelphia also caused concerns about public health. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) indicated that this material was used as a motor fuel additive; was not immediately dangerous to life; was not very volatile; was combustible, but not flammable; was an irritant to eyes and the upper respiratory tract; and, depending on the concentration and duration of exposure, symptoms could include irritation, dermatitis, narcosis, and coma. The agency could not comment on specific public health concerns without knowing the exact concentrations in the air surrounding the source of the spill. The air monitoring devices HNU Systems Inc. Photoionization Detector or Organic Vapor Analyzer would be able to measure those concentrations in air. Due to the behavior of the product (similar to diesel fuel) and the possible health hazards involved from exposure to the chemical, the material was allowed to evaporate naturally and was washed out from under dock areas by fire hoses. None of the cumene spilled was recovered. Countermeasures and Mitigation: The Philadelphia Fire Department HAZMAT Team took control of the response at the incident site. Offloading and lightering operations were discontinued and the vessel remained at the GATX terminal until April 1 when it was moved to anchorage in the Delaware River to facilitate removing the product trapped under the piers. Commercial and public lands were closed until air monitoring revealed safe levels, and shipping lane and vehicle traffic route closures were in effect for the first few hours of the response. Diversionary and protective booms were placed at creek mouths and water intakes as precautionary protection for these sensitive areas. Open-water recovery or shoreline cleanup were not undertaken. Other Special Interest Issues: Because of the hazardous nature of the product, Tri-State Bird Rescue Research Center decided not to jeopardize the health of their volunteers by undertaking wildlife rehabilitation. No reports of injured animals were received. [SEP] GNOME generated movie (trajectory) for a release a max. flood tide. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] Brief Weather Outlook: Sunday Afternoon: Sunny, with a high near 80. East wind around 10 mph. Sunday Night: Mostly clear, with a low around 67. East wind between 5 and 10 mph. Monday: Sunny, with a high near 81. East wind between 5 and 10 mph. Monday Night: Partly cloudy, with a low around 71. East wind around 10 mph. Tuesday: Mostly sunny, with a high near 81. East wind around 10 mph. In general, with respect to trajectory implications, E winds at around 10 mph are predicted for the forecast period. Current winds at Galveston are E at 12 mph. [SEP] (credit, NOAA) http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/ofs/gbofs/boli_cur.html [SEP] General Description of Cumene: A clear colorless liquid with an aromatic odor. Flash point 115??F. Less dense than water (floats on water) and insoluble in water. Vapors heavier than air. HIGHLY FLAMMABLE: Will be easily ignited by heat, sparks or flames. Vapors may form explosive mixtures with air. Vapors may travel to source of ignition and flash back. May be moderately toxic by inhalation, ingestion and skin absorption. Narcotic action with long-lasting effects; depressant to central nervous system. (Source, CAMEO Chemicals, http://cameochemicals.noaa.gov) [SEP] The following is an updated trajectory analysis, and I apologize in advance that is rather lengthy for what it actually states. If there are any questions, or if any of the information was received incorrectly, please do not hesitate to call me because it may affect the trajectory analysis. Use this information as a prospective to the potential threat only. There is always uncertainty when predicting what might be a realistic discharge threat from an event that hasn???€?t happened. Changes in tide, wind, atmospheric stability, as well as the actual release rate and volume may have a major affect on any predicted outcome. This area is highly dynamic with respect to tidal flow and currents; as a resut, the conditiona are constantly changing. In this situation, a worse case discharge of the entire barge cargo would be considered unlikely; therefore, in response to your request, the loss of up to one hold or tank (and even half that amount) was used to assess a likely threat given the situation. If the nature of the threat changes, we can explore the risks of a complete failure of the barge if requested. The important point is that even the loss of one cargo hold will create a significant threat under most conditions. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (206) 849-9928, cell T/B 28018 Initial NOAA Trajectory Analysis On the morning of 19 October 2008, USCG MSU Galveston responded to a barge hard aground at MM 351/Buoy No. 5, which is near Pelican Cut on the ICW. The barge, Kirby T/B 28018, is carrying 23,000 bbl of Cumene. The USCG requested a trajectory analysis. In short, the actual time of any release and the volume released will dictate the transport and the actual risk. Cumene is a significant fire and explosive risk near the source during any release. This document does little to predict an actual trajectory, but does provide a prospect as to the effect of the tide cycle on transport and the real flammability hazard associated with Cumene. Cumene will not persist and will eventually evaporate much like a gasoline spill. On a flood tide, the Texas City area is at risk even form a relatively small release. On an ebb tide, the chemical will move toward the Gulf of Mexico, but if the current slacks at just the wrong time???€? it will move chemical into the port area around Galveston due to the dominate E wind. Cumene is moderately toxic and will be smelled by the public at levels far below any hazard concern creating at the least a perceived health concern. Air monitoring should be deployed immediately if there is any release that threatens populated areas. A more detailed hazard and trajectory assessment follows. General Description of Cumene: A clear colorless liquid with an aromatic odor. Flash point 115??F. Less dense than water (floats on water) and insoluble in water. Vapors heavier than air. HIGHLY FLAMMABLE: Will be easily ignited by heat, sparks or flames. Vapors may form explosive mixtures with air. Vapors may travel to source of ignition and flash back. May be moderately toxic by inhalation, ingestion and skin absorption. Narcotic action with long-lasting effects; depressant to central nervous system. (Source, CAMEO Chemicals, http://cameochemicals.noaa.gov) Trajectory Analysis: The reported position was 29?? 21.28???€? N Lat. 094?? 48.43???€? W Long. This position places
The USCG is responding to an observed slick 20 miles of the Louisiana Coast near Grand Isle.  There is no identified source at present. [SEP] There was no additional information provided or scientific support requested related to this event; therefore, this entry will serve as the final report unless it is learned that there was appreciable injury or any other new information that would reopen this response hotline. Long sentence that simply means: case closed due to lack of any new information. The observed slick/sheen was expected to have dissipated natural. Note, it was reported that an intermittent natural seep is located in this area. There are also several facilities that are being repaired from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The SSC is awaiting documentation of the reported natural seep to address several mystery releases that have been observed in this area. If this information becomes available, it will be added to this case file and assessed in relationship to this mystery spill. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] On Saturday evening, 18 October 2008, USCG MSU Morgan City notified the NOAA HAZMAT Duty Officer (HDO) of a mystery slick off the Louisiana Coast. The HDO alerted the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator to provide an initial assessment as to the potential for coastal impacts. The source of the report was an observer flying a routine surveillance mission of the GI-47c platform, a chronic source of periodic leaks since Hurricane Katrina. The observer reported two mystery slicks to the NRC. The largest was a 4.5-mile long slick at 28?? 59.86???€? N Lat. 089?? 52.48???€? W Long. This position is approximately 20 miles S of Grand Isle, Louisiana. The observer reported that it was not thought to be associated with the GI-47C repairs. NOAA provided a verbal trajectory analysis to the USCG and recommended a follow-up overflight the following day. The conditions at the time were for offshore transport, and these conditions were expected to continue through the weekend. [SEP] (image credit, google)
On the evening of 8 October 2008, USCG MSU Galveston contacted the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator to request support for a grounded red flag barge carrying 23,000 gallons of Light Cycle Oil.  The reported location was 29° 31.11’ N Lat. 094° 30.34’ W Long.  This position places the grounded barge in the ICW at Rollover Pass on the Bolivar Peninsula.  The closest city is Gilchrist, TX. [SEP] The Kirby T/B 30410, loaded with ~23,015 bbls of light cycle oil, grounded at MM 329 for about 3-hours this evening. It has successfully refloated without tug assist. The UTV Dixie Courage is now pushing the T/B 30410 with the T/B 25300 to the Kirby Fleeting Area in Texas City (~7 hour transit). Both barges are double-hull and the master reports no damage to either barge. The USCG has requested hourly soundings of the voids and cargo tanks during transit. Our investigating officer and inspectors will attend the barge at first light. The USCG reports that they have had five groundings at MM 329 in the past three weeks. This evening, the UTV Captain reported he was in the middle of the channel when his lead barge grounded. (Information provided by CO, MSU Galveston) [SEP] This area is highly sensitive and very near the Anahuac NRW. The bayside of Bolivar Peninsula is dominated by coastal marshes and tidal flats, which attract large numbers of coastal birds. No formal RAR was completed since the vessel was refloated, before the process could be completed. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] Brief Weather Forecast (NWS): Tonight: Clear, with a low around 65. North wind between 10 and 15 mph, with gusts as high as 20 mph. Thursday: Sunny, with a high near 82. East wind around 10 mph. Thursday Night: Mostly clear, with a low around 70. East wind around 5 mph. [SEP] Tidal Heights at Gilchrist, East Bay, Galveston Bay, TEXAS Station No. 4353 Latitude: 29?? 31.00' N Longitude: 94?? 29.00' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water +03:16 Low Water +04:18 High water height difference: (*0.86+0.0) Low water height difference: (*0.86+0.0) Based on GALVESTON (calculated from constituent data) From Wed Oct 08, 2008 to Sat Oct 11, 2008 (4 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Highest Tide - Wed Oct 08, 2008; 06:53 am; 1.5ft Lowest Tide - Wed Oct 08, 2008; 10:24 pm; 0.4ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 10/08/2008 06:53 +1.5 High Wed 22:24 +0.4 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 10/09/2008 06:36 +1.5 High Thu 23:21 +0.5 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 10/10/2008 06:34 +1.5 High Fri 13:48 +1.3 Low 15:37 +1.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 10/11/2008 00:11 +0.5 Low Sat 06:36 +1.4 High 13:17 +1.1 Low 17:16 +1.3 High [SEP] Light Cycle Oil, or LCO, is a mid-range crude oil distillate that is used as feedstock for further refining. LCO is a complex mixture of hydrocarbons. Its exact composition depends on the source of the crude oil from which it was produced and the refining methods used. Most of these products are characterized as combustible liquids with respect to flammability. No specific information for this product was provided. [SEP] (image credit, google) [SEP] Initial and Final Report On the evening of 8 October 2008, USCG MSU Galveston contacted the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator to request support for a grounded red flag barge carrying 23,000 gallons of Light Cycle Oil. The reported location was 29?? 31.11???€? N Lat. 094?? 30.34???€? W Long. This position places the grounded barge in the ICW at Rollover Pass on the Bolivar Peninsula. The closest city is Gilchrist, TX. The barge was part of tow of two red flagged (a term that denotes a hazardous product) barges, only one of the barges was reported to have grounded. The time of the grounding was reported as 1430 hrs (local time), but the USCG was not notified until just before contacting NOAA. The time of the NOAA notification was 1900 hrs. At the time of the incident, the tide was dropping. Light Cycle Oil, or LCO, is a middle crude oil distillate that is used as feedstock for further refining. This area is highly sensitive and very near the Anahuac NRW. The bayside of Bolivar Peninsula is dominated by coastal marshes and tidal flats, which attract large numbers of coastal birds. Fortunately, before the trajectory and Resources at Risk (RAR) analysis was even completed, the USCG was notified that barge had refloated. The tidal information had already been passed to the USCG. The barge must have only been slightly aground on a soft bar on the inside of Rollover Pass, because high tide was not for another 10 hours when the barge was reported as ???€?no longer aground.???€? No pollution was reported. Case closed. Lagniappe Rollover pass is a man-made cut through Bolivar Peninsula that links the Gulf of Mexico to East Bay. The pass was opened in 1955 to enhance bay water salinity and promote submerged vegetation development. The name, Rollover, was taken from the practice of smugglers during Spanish rule that would roll barrels of whiskey and rum from the Gulf of Mexico over the narrow peninsula to be recovered by a vessel on the bayside bypassing the customs office at Galveston. On 13 September, less than one month ago, Hurricane Ike made landfall very near this location devastating the adjacent communities.
The Tug Twilite grounded approximately 25 miles up the Wood River from Dillingham, AK late on 07Oct2008 and is reported to contain 1,000 gallons of gasoline and 300-350 gallons of lube oil. No release has been reported and transfer operations are being planned. Sector Anchorage has requested NOAA Wx and tide support. [SEP] GE image of Location [SEP] /C FMTP PANC 100703 FORECAST MISHAP TEXT PRODUCT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK 1100 PM AKDT THU OCT 09 2008 TUG TWI-LITE INCIDENT 36 HOUR FORECAST THURSDAY NIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY NIGHT WINDS: TONIGHT...NORTH WIND 10 TO 15 MPH BECOMING SOUTHWEST 10 TO 20 MPH AFTER MIDNIGHT. FRI...SOUTH WIND 10 TO 20 MPH. FRI NIGHT...VARIABLE WIND 10 MPH OR LESS BECOMING NORTHWEST 10 TO 20 MPH. SAT...NORTHWEST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH. PRECIPITATION: TONIGHT...RAIN SHOWERS. FRI...RAIN. FRI NIGHT...RAIN SHOWERS. SAT...RAIN SHOWERS. TEMPERATURES: LOW TONIGHT...35 HIGH FRI...43 LOW FRI NIGHT...35 HIGH SAT...40 THIS STATEMENT WILL BE UPDATED AT 5 AM AKDT FRI. AMD OCT 08 National Weather Service, Anchorage Alaska - Ph. 907-266-5172 NOAA HAZMAT DUTY OFFICER- Ph. 206-526-4911 [SEP] FORECAST MISHAP TEXT PRODUCT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK 500 PM AKDT THU OCT 09 2008 TUG TWI-LITE INCIDENT 36 HOUR FORECAST THURSDAY AFTERNOON THROUGH FRIDAY NIGHT WINDS: TONIGHT...EAST WIND 15 TO 25 MPH BECOMING SOUTHEAST 10 MPH BY MIDNIGHT. FRI...SOUTHEAST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH. FRI NIGHT...VARIABLE WIND 10 MPH OR LESS. SAT...NORTHWEST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH. PRECIPITATION: TONIGHT...RAIN. FRI...RAIN. FRI NIGHT...RAIN SHOWERS. SAT...RAIN SHOWERS. TEMPERATURES: LOW TONIGHT...37 HIGH FRI...44 LOW FRI NIGHT...35 HIGH SAT...40 THIS STATEMENT WILL BE UPDATED AT 11 PM AKDT THU. RMC OCT 08 National Weather Service, Anchorage Alaska - Ph. 907-266-5172 NOAA HAZMAT DUTY OFFICER- Ph. 206-526-4911 [SEP] /C FMTP PANC 110653 FORECAST MISHAP TEXT PRODUCT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK 1100 PM AKDT FRI OCT 10 2008 TUG TWI-LITE INCIDENT 36 HOUR FORECAST FRIDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY WINDS: TONIGHT...NORTHWEST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH. SAT...NORTHWEST WIND 15 TO 25 MPH. SAT NIGHT...NORTHWEST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH. SUN...WEST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH WITH GUSTS TO 30 MPH. PRECIPITATION: TONIGHT...RAIN SHOWERS LIKELY...MIXING WITH SNOW TOWARD MORNING. SAT...RAIN AND SNOW SHOWERS. SAT NIGHT...ISOLATED SNOW SHOWERS SUN...NONE. TEMPERATURES: LOW TONIGHT...33 HIGH SAT...37 LOW SAT NIGHT...24 HIGH SUN...34 THIS STATEMENT WILL BE UPDATED AT 5 AM AKDT SAT. AMD OCT 08 National Weather Service, Anchorage Alaska - Ph. 907-266-5172 NOAA HAZMAT DUTY OFFICER- Ph. 206-526-4911 [SEP] FORECAST MISHAP TEXT PRODUCT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK 500 AM AKDT SAT OCT 11 2008 TUG TWI-LITE INCIDENT 36 HOUR FORECAST FRIDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY WINDS: SAT...NORTHWEST WIND 15 TO 25 MPH. SAT NIGHT...NORTHWEST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH. SUN...WEST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH WITH GUSTS TO 30 MPH. PRECIPITATION: SAT...RAIN SHOWERS...CHANGING TO SNOW SHOWERS THIS AFTERNOON. SAT NIGHT...ISOLATED SNOW SHOWERS. SUN...NONE. TEMPERATURES: HIGH SAT...37 LOW SAT NIGHT...23 HIGH SUN...34 THIS STATEMENT WILL BE UPDATED AT 11 AM AKDT SAT. AMD OCT 08 National Weather Service, Anchorage Alaska - Ph. 907-266-5172 NOAA HAZMAT DUTY OFFICER- Ph. 206-526-4911 [SEP] /C FMTP PANC 090700 FORECAST MISHAP TEXT PRODUCT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK 1100 PM AKDT WED OCT 08 2008 TUG TWI-LITE INCIDENT 36 HOUR FORECAST TONIGHT THROUGH THURSDAY NIGHT WINDS: WED NIGHT...NORTHEAST WIND 15 TO 20 MPH WITH GUSTS TO 30 MPH. THU...NORTHEAST WIND 25 MPH WITH GUSTS TO 35 MPH BECOMING EAST 35 TO 40 MPH BY NOON. THU NIGHT...EAST WIND 20 TO 25 MPH DIMINISHING TO SOUTH 10 TO 20 MPH LATE IN THE EVENING. PRECIPITATION: WED NIGHT...A CHANCE OF SNOW TOWARD MORNING. THU...RAIN AND SNOW LIKELY IN THE MORNING TURNING TO ALL RAIN BY NOON. THU NIGHT...RAIN LIKELY. TEMPERATURES: LOW WED NIGHT...26 HIGH THU...41 LOW THU NIGHT...36 THIS STATEMENT WILL BE UPDATED AT 5 AM AKDT THU. AD OCT 08 National Weather Service, Anchorage Alaska - Ph. 907-266-5172 NOAA HAZMAT DUTY OFFICER- Ph. 206-526-6317 [SEP] FORECAST MISHAP TEXT PRODUCT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK 500 AM AKDT THU OCT 09 2008 TUG TWI-LITE INCIDENT 36 HOUR FORECAST TODAY THROUGH FRIDAY WINDS: THU...NORTHEAST WIND 20 TO 25 MPH WITH GUSTS TO 35 MPH BECOMING EAST 30 TO 35 MPH BY NOON. THU NIGHT...EAST WIND 20 TO 25 MPH DIMINISHING TO SOUTH 10 TO 20 MPH IN THE EVENING. FRI...EAST WIND 10 TO 15 MPH. PRECIPITATION: THU...SNOW LIKELY IN THE MORNING...MIXING WITH AND TURNING TO ALL RAIN BY NOON. THU NIGHT...RAIN LIKELY. FRI...SCATTERED RAIN SHOWERS. TEMPERATURES: HIGH THU...40 LOW THU NIGHT...36 HIGH FRI...44 THIS STATEMENT WILL BE UPDATED AT 11 AM AKDT THU. AMD OCT 08 National Weather Service, Anchorage Alaska - Ph. 907-266-5172 NOAA HAZMAT DUTY OFFICER- Ph. 206-526-6317 [SEP] /C FMTP PANC 110043 FORECAST MISHAP TEXT PRODUCT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK 500 PM AKDT FRI OCT 10 2008 TUG TWI-LITE INCIDENT 36 HOUR FORECAST FRIDAY THROUGH SATURDAY WINDS: TONIGHT...SOUTH WIND 10 TO 15 MPH BECOMING NORTHWEST 10 TO 20 MPH AFTER MIDNIGHT. SAT...NORTHWEST WIND 10 TO 20 MPH. SAT NIGHT...NORTHWEST WIND 10 TO 25 MPH. SUN...WEST WIND 10 TO 15 MPH WITH GUSTS TO 30 MPH. PRECIPITATION: TONIGHT...RAIN SHOWERS MIXING WITH SNOW AFTER MIDNIGHT. SAT...RAIN AND SNOW SHOWERS. SAT NIGHT...SCATTERED SNOW SHOWERS SUN...NONE. TEMPERATURES: LOW TONIGHT...32 HIGH SAT...37 LOW SAT NIGHT...26 HIGH SUN...35 THIS STATEMENT WILL BE UPDATED AT 11 PM AKDT FRI. RMC OCT 08 National Weather Service, Anchorage Alaska - Ph. 907-266-5172 NOAA HAZMAT DUTY OFFICER- Ph. 206-526-4911 [SEP] TIME: 1445 ADT Wednesday, October 8, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Tug Twi-Lite For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at expected tides for the grounded Tug Twi-Lite. The tug is reported grounded on the Wood River, upstream from Dillingham, AK, at location 59??16'12"N--158??35'0"W. That location is about 25 miles up the Wood River from Dillingham, near the lake that feeds it. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) TIDES: The closest NOAA Tide station is located at Snag Point, near Dillingham. We have spoken to a representative of Alaska Fish and Game that has worked at a fish counting station near the tug location. The tidal fluctuations are felt at that location, but they are greatly diminished. The lag time is about 2-3 hours behind the tides at Dillingham. With high tides around 18 feet, which we expect for the next few days, we expect the tidal fluctuation at that location to be about 2 feet. The current in the river may reverse slightly at the max flood tide. The smaller high each day is unlikely to be observed at the tug location. In summary: Expect: High of about 2 feet at around 0300 Thursday Low at about 2100 Thursday High of about 2 feet at around 0330 Friday Low at about 2200 Friday The higher high tide is dropping slowly over the next few days from it's high Tuesday night. Below is a text summary of the tides at Snag Point for the next few days. A graphical version is enclosed with this report. Tidal Heights at Snag Point, Nushagak Bay, Bristol Bay, ALASKA Station No. 2481 Latitude: 59?? 2.00' N Longitude: 158?? 27.00' W From Wed Oct 08, 2008 to Sat Oct 11, 2008 (4 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Highest Tide - Thu Oct 09, 2008; 12:12 am; 18.8ft Lowest Tide - Wed Oct 08, 2008; 05:47 pm; 1.7ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 10/08/2008 06:09 +5.4 Low Wed 11:03 +13.7 High 17:47 +1.7 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 10/09/2008 00:12 +18.8 High Thu 06:53 +5.2 Low 11:52 +14.0 High 18:34 +2.0 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 10/10/2008 00:52 +18.5 High Fri 07:36 +4.7 Low 12:44 +14.3 High 19:23 +2.5 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 10/11/2008 01:32 +18.2 High Sat 08:18 +4.1 Low 13:38 +15.0 High 20:14 +3.0 Low [SEP] /C FMTP PANC 090044 FORECAST MISHAP TEXT PRODUCT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE ANCHORAGE AK 500 PM AKDT THU OCT 08 2008 TUG TWI-LITE INCIDENT 36 HOUR FORECAST TONIGHT THROUGH THURSDAY NIGHT WINDS: WED NIGHT...NORTHEAST WIND 10 TO 15 MPH IN THE EVENING...INCREASING TO NORTHEAST 20 MPH WITH GUSTS TO 30 MPH AFTER MIDNIGHT. THU...NORTHEAST WIND 20 MPH WITH GUSTS TO 30 MPH INCREASING TO EAST 30 TO 40 MPH BY NOON. THU NIGHT...EAST WIND 20 TO 25 MPH DIMINISHING TO SOUTHEAST 10 TO 15 MPH LATE IN THE EVENING. PRECIPITATION: WED NIGHT...A CHANCE OF SNOW TOWARD MORNING. THU...RAIN AND SNOW LIKELY IN THE MORNING TURNING TO ALL RAIN BY NOON. THU NIGHT...RAIN LIKELY. TEMPERATURES: LOW WED NIGHT...24 HIGH THU...41 LOW THU NIGHT...36 THIS STATEMENT WILL BE UPDATED AT 11 PM AKDT WED. EZ OCT 08 National Weather Service, Anchorage Alaska - Ph. 907-266-5172 NOAA HAZMAT DUTY OFFICER- Ph. 206-526-6317 [SEP] According to USCG Sector Anchorage, the Tug Twilite was pumped, pulled off and taken to the haul out location on Wednesday (15OCT2008) without incident. Case closed for ERD. JStout, SSC [SEP] Though attempts to remove the tug were planned for last night, they were not completed. Work
A small oil slick estimated at 3 bbls was observed at 29° 21.28’ N Lat. 089° 14.14’ W Long at 1000 hrs (local time).  This position places the observed slick approximately 3 miles NW of Main Pass and roughly 6 to 8 miles SSW of Breton Island. [SEP] Reported slick location on 4 Oct. 2008 (image credit, google). [SEP] On 4 October 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a small oil slick, estimated at 3 bbls, observed at 29?? 21.28???€? N Lat. 089?? 14.14???€? W Long at 1000 hrs (local time). This position places the observed slick approximately 3 miles NW of Main Pass and roughly 6 to 8 miles SSW of Breton Island. A trajectory analysis was requested. The good news is that Breton Island is not at risk. The bad news is that the Delta National Wildlife Refuge is at risk. The risk is only limited by the reported spill volume observed (3 bbl). A second overflight is planned for today. [SEP] Chart providing the position of the reported slick. Note, these NOAA charts do not reflect the land loss in the Mississippi Delta. See attached maps for comparison. [SEP] There was no additional information provided or scientific support requested related to this event; therefore, this entry will serve as the final report unless it is learned that there was appreciable injury or any other new information that would reopen this response hotline. Long sentence that simply means: case closed due to lack of any new information. [SEP] In a follow up call from the USCG on Saturday evening, it was reported that the slick, was very near the shoreline, but expected to continue to break up. The Delta Nation Wildlife Refuge had been notified. This hotline will remain open pending any reports of impact to the refuge. At present, the source was still unknown. Based on the photographs provided... it didn't appear to be breaking up very fast, but the volume did appear as relatively small. The oil look like it might be a condensate crude due to the reddish brown color. Many of the light condensate crude lack the heavy asphalt fraction characteristic of "black" oils. [SEP] Reported Situation: A small oil slick estimated at 3 bbls was observed at 29?? 21.28???€? N Lat. 089?? 14.14???€? W Long at 1000 hrs (local time). This position places the observed slick approximately 3 miles NW of Main Pass and roughly 6 to 8 miles SSW of Breton Island. Initial Trajectory Analysis The good news is that Breton Island is not at risk. The bad news is that the Delta National Wildlife Refuge is at risk. The risk is only limited by the reported spill volume observed (3 bbl). It is likely that light oiling could impact the marshes and tidal passes of Denesse Pass, Kimble Pass, and possibly even the marshes on the E side of Baptiste Collette Bayou this evening or tonight. These areas are all part of the refuge and migratory birds, shore birds, and pelicans utilize these areas. At present, the wind is reported to be E at between 5 and 10 mph and is expected to increase slightly during the evening hours. The tide is at the end of an ebb cycle and will flood through the evening with a high tide expected after midnight. Often, there is a long shore current that moves S along the delta near the 20-30 foot depth contour due to flow from the upper portions of Breton Sound. Whether the slick is in this flow or not, is not that important, because at some point (probably already), the slick would be expected to move past the influence of any down-coast current and into the shallow waters of the Mississippi Delta. At that point, the transport would be wind and tidal current dominated and both transport factors combined would result in an onshore condition. Because of the uncertainty in precisely predicting spill trajectories in such a dynamic area such as the Mississippi Delta, the risk to a wildlife refuge, and the unknown nature of the source, follow up observations are recommended. The Delta Wildlife Refuge should also be notified of the potential threat. Weather Forecast Saturday Afternoon: Mostly sunny, with a high near 85. East wind around 10 mph. Saturday Night: Mostly clear, with a low around 68. East wind around 15 mph. Sunday: Partly sunny, with a high near 85. Breezy, with an east wind between 15 and 20 mph. Sunday Night: Mostly cloudy, with a low around 70. Breezy, with an east wind between 15 and 20 mph. Monday: A 30 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms. Mostly cloudy, with a high near 83. Breezy, with an east wind between 15 and 20 mph. [SEP] These images were taken during an overflight on Sat. evening, 4 Oct. by the USCG. While there wasn't a precise location provided, it was reported as just off the Delta National Wildlife Refuge (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Reported slick location on 4 Oct. 2008 (image credit, google). [SEP] These images were taken during an overflight on Sat. evening, 4 Oct. by the USCG. While there wasn't a precise location provided, it was reported as just off the Delta National Wildlife Refuge (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] These images were taken during an overflight on Sat. evening, 4 Oct. by the USCG. While there wasn't a precise location provided, it was reported as just off the Delta National Wildlife Refuge (photo credit, USCG).
At 0630 today, a sheen was reported of about 1 x 6 miles in size. Its location was reported as 28°17'56"N--092°00'40"W. That location is about 70 miles south of Marsh Island.At 1100, the sheen was reported to have the same general characteristics.At 1330, it was reported to be about 5 by 10 miles in size, and breaking up, at location: 28°7'23"N--91°49'56"W [SEP] TIME: 1700 CDT Friday, October 3, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Sheen at South Marsh Island Block 30 For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a sheen south of Marsh Island. At 0630 today, a sheen was reported of about 1 x 6 miles in size. Its location was reported as 28??17'56"N--092??00'40"W. That location is about 70 miles south of Marsh Island. At 1100, the sheen was reported to have the same general characteristics. At 1330, it was reported to be about 5 by 10 miles in size, and breaking up, at location: 28??7'23"N--91??49'56"W If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Observations from the Marsh Island weather station indicate that winds have been calm for the last 24 hours, with some slight SSW winds early in the morning and last night. Tonight: South winds 5 to 10 knots. Seas 2 feet or less. Saturday: Southeast winds 5 to 10 knots. Seas 2 feet or less. Saturday night: Southeast winds around 10 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Sunday: East winds 10 to 15 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. 2) TRAJECTORY: Where the sheen came from: In that region, the movement of the oil will be dominated by the wind, with some slight influence by a coastal current. The winds have been light. The coastal current observed to the west by the TABS Buoy's F and R are small and to the East. The sheen was observed to have moved to the east during the day. We expect that the sheen came from fairly nearby to the west. As the forecast is for south and southeast winds tonight and tomorrow, we expect the sheen to move slightly to the north and perhaps the west, but it is not likely to get far before it has broken up and is hard to observe. 3) OIL FATE: We can not calculate the weathering of an unknown product but we expect it to continue to break up as has during the day. If the winds tonight are closer to the 10 knot end of the forecast, the sheen may not be visible in the morning. If the winds remain light, it could persist a bit longer. [SEP] On Friday, 3 October 2008, the USCG requested a trajectory for a slick observed offshore of Louisiana, some 70 S of Marsh Island. NOAA provided a trajectory assessment of the sheen. The last report stated that the slick - sheen was breaking up. Based on that observation and the location offshore, this entry will constitute the final report also unless additional information is provided or there request for additional support.
Sector Anchorage receive a notification on Oct. 1 that the M/V Nunaniq had discharged 50 gallons of diesel fuel into Mekoryuk Bay during the night of Sept. 27.  The vessel had struck a rock while delivering cargo to the native village of Mekoryuk and a fuel tank suffered a pin hole size puncture.   The fuel in the damaged tank was transferred to another tank and the vessel's crew conducted a cleanup with sorbent pads.  USFWS personnel from the Yukon Delta NWR flew to the scene on Sept. 28, and made numerous observations and photos which are contained in a report posted on this hotline.   Sector Anchorage notified the NOAA Alaska SSC on Oct. 2 and asked for an evaluation of the situation.   Also on Oct. 2, a CG team was dispatched to Bethel and Nunivak Island to do an on-scene evaluation. [SEP] Detailed Map [SEP] CG conducted a C-130 overflight on Oct. 2 and captured 7 photos in the attached Power Point file. No oil was observed from this vantage point. [SEP] Detailed On-scene report; Yukon Delta NWR biologists along with NOAA SSC additions [SEP] Bushy's estimate is that on the northside of the island where the spill happened, the tide would be about 1 hr behind this Shio tide station. [SEP] Nunivak I [SEP] ushy I know it may seem trivial, but I would like to put these communications into responselink so that we or others can find and make use of this information in the future. I especially value saving the report by the wildlife biologists. It is a small event with good observations. Especially what resource injuries were looked for and NOT found with the macrofauna. No fish kills, the seagrass looks OK, no bird injuries (including the photographed shorebirds on the Fucus rock), I am not totally convinced that the jellyfish were killed by the oil. In our numerous trips to Prince William Sound, in coves with active streams (ie, Snug harbor) during flood tide we frequently see congregations of jellyfish drifting 1/2 to several meters below the surface toward the stream source, while the surface water itself, above a fresher-water shear of a few inches, is moving out of the coves. This concentrates jellies near the stream mouth. Afew get stranded on the stream mouth flats. If was present in such a situation, stranded jellies could end up in pools of oil during the ebb. Those that did so would probably die. Those that stranded but not in oil would also probably die, naturally. Thus a look at a reference stream mouth would be and important comparison. I do not doubt that diesel has soaked into the soft sediment and is injuring the infauna. Observes should watch for amphipods, polychaetes, clams emerging on the sediment surface, possibly to be scavenged by shorebirds. That's a route of exposure. Wil diesel in the sediment there could be delayed or longer-term injuries to infauna and possibly their prey. Fortunately this may not be like the No. 2 fuel spill at WoodsHole Mass marshes 30 years ago where researchers are still finding fresh diesel a half foot below the sediment surface. This diesel is on and in the mudflat sediment where, with numerous tidal exchamges, it should leach out fairly quickly. No doubt the local populace will be watching this area, which is probably very well known to them. I would value seeing any future reports. It might be good to know the temperature and alinity history at a few points sorrounding the site. Also, the primary piece of information missing is the actual volume spilled. I hope that gets confirmed. So, can we please put this in ResponseLink? Alan
On the evening of 17 September 2008, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a well blowout in Grand Bayou Blue at 29° 28.011’ N Lat. 090° 22.901’ W Long.  This position places the release approximately 10 miles NNW of Galliano Louisiana. [SEP] Wx for Gallinao, Louisiana Overnight: Mostly clear, with a low around 66. North wind around 5 mph. Thursday: Mostly sunny, with a high near 83. Northeast wind between 5 and 10 mph. Thursday Night: A 20 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms. Partly cloudy, with a low around 70. East wind around 5 mph. Friday: A slight chance of showers, with thunderstorms also possible after 1pm. Mostly cloudy, with a high near 82. East wind around 5 mph. Chance of precipitation is 20%. Friday Night: A 30 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms. Mostly cloudy, with a low around 71. East wind around 5 mph. [SEP] (see attached file) [SEP] Image of reported location (image credit, google). Note marsh loss relative to the much older NOAA Chart. [SEP] Image of reported location (image credit, google). Note marsh loss relative to the much older NOAA Chart. This image is simply an expanded view of the previous image. [SEP] On the evening of 17 September 2008, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a well blowout in Grand Bayou Blue at 29?? 28.011???€? N Lat. 090?? 22.901???€? W Long. This position places the release approximately 10 miles NNW of Galliano Louisiana. The USCG reported that the incident was observed at 1700 hrs (local time). The owner/operator reported that the christmas tree and small platform were missing. The cause is unknown, but may have been an allision. The initial report was a 8-10 foot gusher of oil, but by 2200 hrs, the gush had decreased to on 2-3 feet in height (possible bridging in). The amount of oil released is unknown. An Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) has been dispatched with 4000 feet of boom. The USCG is coordinating either a RP or USCG overflight in the morning to assess oil pollution and the status of the well. NOTE: The light winds predicted this evening may enhance the risk of fire and explosion near the well blowout. There will not be much wind. If there is significant natural gas escaping, the heavier components such as propane will not quickly dissipate and could accumulate and spread out from the wellhead. Proper safety precautions should be used to include establishment of a safety zone and air monitoring for personnel safety. The lack of wind will only increase any risk. The safe response is not to be near the source. If any of the above information is wrong, please contact the NOAA SSC as it may have a direct effect on the predicted fate and transport. Initial Trajectory. The area identified is essentially an open water lake surrounded by highly broken coastal marsh. The current water levels are back to near normal tides after the storm surge from Hurricane Ike created an estimated 4-foot surge above normal tides in this area. The winds this evening have had been primarily from the N between at 3 to 8 mph. The forecasted winds overnight are expected to be light with a slight N component. By Thursday afternoon, the winds will have shifted to the NE then E and there is a 20% chance of evening showers. The observed winds would initially transport the oil to the broken marsh and canals on the S side of Grand Bayou Blue. Any oil still releasing and uncontained by Thursday afternoon may move to the SW in the direction of Lake Bully Camp Ponds. Given that natural containment is limited by the broken marsh and he network of man-made canals and bayous, the oil may continue to spread due to the influence of both winds and tides. We don't know when the accident started but it is likely that by tomorrow morning the spill would have undergone at least one complete tide cycle. Within the canals, tidal currents could move the oil about 1 -2 miles in either direction. With moderate winds from the N oil would move into the canal system to the S and enter Grand Bayou (which is about 3 miles south of the spill location) within 2 tidal cycles. The next high tide is predicted for the early morning, which could move oil into and through the broken marsh to the N. Tides are difficult to predict in this area especially with the freshwater flow and any lingering effects of Hurricane Ike flooding. The point is, oil could move both N, S, and W over the next 24-hour period, but the dominate movement should be S and SW. Initial Recommendation to Consider. Insure safety (see above). The response actions should focus on source control, containment near source at a safe distance due to potential fire and explosive issues from any natural gas released, and booming the affected spill area???€? essentially, put a box around the problem to limit the impact by booming off the cuts and canals that would allow oil to escape Grand Bayou Blue. [SEP] The closest tide station is in Terrebone Bay and is about 20 miles away fro the spill location. It has a predicted range a range of a little over a foot. To estimate tides for Grand Bayou Blue, We took the average wave speed and water depth and came up with the following ???€?best guess???€? to support the initial trajectory. The times could be off by as much as plus or minus 2 hours without taking into account and freshwater flow which was also investigated. Tide Prediction for Grand Bayou Blue Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 09/17/2008 04:36 +1.3 High Wed 14:15 +0.8 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 09/18/2008 05:03 +1.6 High Thu 15:43 +0.7 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 09/19/2008 05:46 +1.7 High Fri 17:09 +0.9 Low The range is probably less than a foot. Attached is a graph of water level at Lapeyrouse, La to the West but up in the marsh like the spill site. Note the water level change is only about1/2 foot. Another station up at Houma is even less. Probably max flow at less than 1/5 knot. In the canals into and out of Grand Bayou Blue, tidal currents will max out at about 1/3 knot with tidal excursion of about 2 miles. As previously stated, these are rough estimations only. Winds of 10 knots or more with windage of .3 knots will dominate over the tide. In the canals, the wind will push the oil to one shore and pile it up and smear it along the shoreline. [SEP] The source has been partially (mostly) controlled by divers securing an underwater valve, but some gas was reported to still be releasing. The current plan is to sting the well on Saturday to fully shut it in. The estimated release is 300 to 400 bbl of crude oil. The OSRO is continuing to secure the pockets of oil and recovery contamination. There is at least one open water skimmer still working in the area. NOAA will continue to provide remote assistance, but may go on scene to assist in any difficult cleanup issues. Such a reduced response posture is simply the balance of the potential impacts of this incident relative to the magnitude of activity post-Hurricanes Gustav and Ike. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] "The boat launch is open and the path is clear to the scene. Not that bad. Source is contained with boom. Responders on scene and working. Oil drift is moving SW. Pics when I get back." The above is the updated brief from the State's overflight. Pictures will be posted when available. Observations on oil drift is in line with the trajectory submitted last night. [SEP] General location relative to SE Louisiana (image credit, google). [SEP] http://waterdata.usgs.gov/la/nwis/rt No station that is close enough to the spill site that we can easily use. [SEP] Note, there has been significant loss of marsh due to oil and gas canals and other land loss factors. Compare this map to the more recent images from Google. [SEP] On Monday, the USCG again had noticed some oil resurfacing, but later in the week (on 2 Oct.) was not observed that at all. The thinking is that what oil that was on the bottom for whatever reason (trapped with debris?) has come up. The cleanup site was moved to passive maintenance due to some oil trapped in the marsh and current low water conditions. LDEQ and LDWF didn't want anybody going into the marsh, so a passive plan was initiated. Unless the situation changes, this entry will constitute the final report.
This information was sent via email to the NOAA SSC on the morning of Tuesday, 16 September 2008.RCVD NRC # 883951 Judd Hogan of air logistics reported at 1457 an unknown sheen located in Ship Shoal Block 154 of the Gulf of Mexico. Conducted an over flight at 1710 and observed the discharge. Discharge appeared to be a bubbling of golden condensate like oil. The bubbling was about 25 ft by 35 ft in size. Total sheen size was 5 miles by 5 miles with a concentrated sheen in the center of dark gold bands with light gold centers approximately 1 1/2 mile by 1 mile. Bubbling broke surface of the water slightly. Sheen was moving northwest and the weather was cloudy with possible rain and a sea of 5ft. Location of the sheen was N28 40.84 and W91 12.64. There was a red buoy approximately 100 ft from the bubbling and a helo deck approximately 400 ft from the bubbling as well. As of this time there is no RP who has come forward or been located. Discharge was first located at 1350 15SEP08.Sheen is approximately 52 miles off shore. Discharge is ongoing at this time and has not been secured. [SEP] Photo courtesy of USCG [SEP] "Discharge appeared to be a bubbling of golden condensate like oil. The bubbling was about 25 ft by 35 ft in size. Total sheen size was 5 miles by 5 miles with a concentrated sheen in the center of dark gold bands with light gold centers approximately 1 1/2 mile by 1 mile. Bubbling broke surface of the water slightly. Sheen was moving northwest and the weather was cloudy with possible rain and a sea of 5ft." [SEP] Photo courtesy of USCG [SEP] Photo courtesy of USCG [SEP] Photo courtesy of USCG [SEP] The USCG MSU Morgan City has identified the RP and they have begun their case. Additional information will be posted as it becomes available. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Date: Sept 16, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Mary Barber FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Offshore sheen off Louisiana coastline FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A 5 mile by 5 mile was reported at 1457 Monday, Sept 15 about 30 miles off the Louisiana coast. The location was reported to be 28 40.84'N by 91?? 12.64' W. Gas and natural gas was reported bubbling up from a 25 ft by 35 ft area and resulting in a 5 mile by 5 mile sheen. The sheen was reported moving to the NW under 5 foot seas. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please contact us with corrected information. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Persistent winds from the NNE to NE at 10 - 15 knots are forecast through Thursday. Combined seas are expected to be 3 - 4 feet. On Friday winds are expected to be from the E at 10 - 15 knots with 2 - 3 foot combined seas. 2) Trajectory Analysis With the source of the sheen about 30 nm from shore, we do not expect any oil to impact land under any conditions. With winds from the NE and coastal currents moving from the East to the West we would expect the sheen to move WSW to SW over the next 2 days and become more Westerly on Friday. Unless the source increases, we expect the extent of the visible sheen to remain about 5 - 6 nm from the source.
Hurricane Ike made landfall during the early morning hours of Sept. 13, 2008, in the Galveston/Houston area of Texas as a Category Two/Three Hurricane (~110mph winds). Storm surge was 20-25ft in some areas. There was severe wind, storm surge and flooding damage in large regions of Texas and Louisiana. The USCG, FEMA, and National Guard personnel are responding. This ResponseLINK Hotline has been established to provide general updates and aid in providing NOAA products to other state and federal agencies during the preparation and expected post-landfall emergency response. Any specific incidents that NOAA’s Office of Response and Restoration (ORR) responds to would likely generate a separate Hotline Account with Ike as a prefix. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR HURRICANE IKE SURVEY...NWS NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LAKE CHARLES LA 330 AM CDT WED OCT 8 2008 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE. .DISCUSSION... A COLD FRONT WILL MOVE ACROSS THE REGION TONIGHT ENDING RAIN CHANCES AND BRINGING IN MUCH DRIER AIR. .TODAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY (10-20 PERCENT). MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 82. MIN HUMIDITY........41 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTH WINDS 9 TO 15 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........1 FOOT OR LESS. TIME (CDT) 6AM 7AM 8AM 9AM 10A 11A 12P 1PM 2PM 3PM 4PM 5PM SKY (%).........18 17 16 15 14 12 11 10 10 10 10 10 WEATHER COV..... WEATHER TYPE.... TEMP............69 70 71 73 76 78 79 81 81 81 81 80 RH..............66 61 61 59 56 50 47 42 41 41 41 42 EYE LVL WND DIR.N N N N N N N N N N N N EYE LVL WND SPD.9 10 11 11 10 10 10 9 9 8 8 7 EYE LVL WND GST.14 15 16 16 15 15 20 14 14 13 13 12 WAVE PERIOD(S)..5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 WAVE HEIGHT(FT).1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 WAVE DIRECTION..N N N N N N N N N N N N .TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLEAR (5-15 PERCENT). MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 67. MAX HUMIDITY........81 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS 9 TO 10 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........1 FOOT OR LESS. .THURSDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY (5-15 PERCENT). MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 82. MIN HUMIDITY........53 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....EAST WINDS AROUND 9 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........1 FOOT OR LESS. .FORECAST DAYS 6 THROUGH 7... .COLUMBUS DAY... MOSTLY CLOUDY. LOWS IN THE MID 70S. HIGHS IN THE LOWER 80S. .TUESDAY... MOSTLY CLOUDY WITH CHANCE OF SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS. LOWS IN THE MID 70S. HIGHS IN THE LOWER 80S. $$ FORECASTER...LANDRENEAU REQUESTED BY...KENT KUYPER TYPE OF REQUEST...HAZMAT .TAG 20080925.HURRI.02/LCH [SEP] Spot Forecast for Hurricane IKE Recovery Operations 6 PM Hazmat Forecast for Wednesday 10/22/08 for Port Arthur and Nearshore Waters Strong cold front will move into the coastal waters late tonight with winds northwest becoming 15 to 20 knots. Winds will continue into Thursday. .DISCUSSION... SOUTHEASTERLY WINDS WILL BRING INCREASING MOISTURE ACROSS THE AREA WITH SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS INCREASING INTO THE EVENING INTO THE OVERNIGHT HOURS AHEAD OF THE COLD FRONT. SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS WILL CHANGE OVER TO RAIN LATE TONIGHT WITH WINDS INCREASING TO 10 TO 15 AROUND SUNRISE AND 15 TO 20 AFTER SUNRISE. AS THE FRONT MOVES EAST ACROSS THE AREA. COLD AIR WILL FILTER IN BEHIND THE FRONT. CONDITIONS TO IMPROVE ON FRIDAY. .TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLOUDY (70-80 PERCENT). CHANCE OF SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS IN THE EVENING...THEN SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS LIKELY AFTER MIDNIGHT. MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 65. MAX HUMIDITY........100 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTH WINDS 6 TO 13 MPH INCREASING TO 16 TO 20 MPH LATE IN THE NIGHT. WAVE HEIGHT.........4 FEET. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.35 INCHES. TIME (CDT) 6PM 7PM 8PM 9PM 10P 11P MID 1AM 2AM 3AM 4AM 5AM SKY (%).........67 69 71 74 77 81 84 86 86 86 86 87 WEATHER COV.....CHC CHC CHC CHC CHC CHC CHC LKY LKY LKY LKY LKY WEATHER TYPE....TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TEMP............74 72 70 69 68 68 67 67 67 67 66 66 RH..............88 95 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 97 89 82 EYE LVL WND DIR.SE SE SE E NE NE N N N N N N EYE LVL WND SPD.7 7 6 6 5 5 5 5 7 10 13 15 EYE LVL WND GST.15 15 15 10 10 10 10 10 15 20 25 30 WAVE HEIGHT(FT).4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 HRLY RAIN (IN)..03 .03 .03 .03 .03 .03 .11 .12 .13 .13 .10 .10 .THURSDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLOUDY (65-75 PERCENT). SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS LIKELY EARLY IN THE MORNING...THEN CHANCE OF SHOWERS IN THE MORNING. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 69. MIN HUMIDITY........63 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....BREEZY. NORTH WINDS 17 TO 25 MPH. WAVE HEIGHT.........6 to 8 FEET. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.10 INCHES. .THURSDAY NIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........PARTLY CLOUDY (30-40 PERCENT). MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 60. MAX HUMIDITY........82 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS 13 TO 18 MPH. WAVE HEIGHT.........4 to 6 FEET. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.00 INCHES. PORT ARTHUR AREA: FRIDAY THROUGH MONDAY .FORECAST DAYS 3 THROUGH 7... .FRIDAY... MOSTLY CLEAR. LOWS IN THE MID 60S. HIGHS IN THE UPPER 70S. NORTHWEST WINDS AROUND 5 MPH. .SATURDAY... MOSTLY CLEAR. LOWS IN THE UPPER 60S. HIGHS IN THE MID 70S. SOUTHEAST WINDS AROUND 6 MPH. .SUNDAY... PARTLY CLOUDY. LOWS IN THE MID 60S. HIGHS IN THE UPPER 70S. SOUTHWEST WINDS AROUND 6 MPH. .MONDAY... MOSTLY CLEAR. LOWS AROUND 60. HIGHS IN THE MID 70S. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR HURRICANE IKE SURVEY...NWS NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LAKE CHARLES LA 437 AM CDT FRI OCT 17 2008 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE. .DISCUSSION... CLOUDY SKIES WITH PATCHY LIGHT RAIN WILL LINGER BEHIND A COLD FRONT TODAY. DRIER AND COOLER AIR WILL MOVE INTO THE REGION TONIGHT AS HIGH PRESSURE BUILDS IN. DRY CONDITIONS WITH COOL NIGHTS AND MILD DAYS WILL PREVAIL OVER THE WEEKEND. .TODAY... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLOUDY (70-80 PERCENT). SLIGHT CHANCE OF RAIN. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 78. MIN HUMIDITY........62 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTH WINDS 12 TO 13 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........2 FEET INCREASING TO 3 FEET IN THE LATE MORNING AND AFTERNOON. TIME (CDT) 7AM 8AM 9AM 10A 11A 12P 1PM 2PM 3PM 4PM 5PM 6PM SKY (%).........85 85 85 84 84 84 84 82 77 73 69 64 WEATHER COV.....SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH WEATHER TYPE....RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN TEMP............72 72 73 74 76 76 77 77 78 78 77 75 RH..............76 76 71 69 64 64 62 64 62 64 69 74 EYE LVL WND DIR.N N N N N N N N N N N N EYE LVL WND SPD.10 10 10 10 10 10 9 9 9 9 9 9 EYE LVL WND GST.18 18 18 18 18 18 15 15 15 15 15 15 WAVE PERIOD(S)..5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 4 WAVE HEIGHT(FT).2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 .TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLOUDY (55-65 PERCENT) THEN BECOMING PARTLY CLOUDY (25-35 PERCENT). MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 66. MAX HUMIDITY........87 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS 12 TO 15 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........4 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........4 FEET. .SATURDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY (10-20 PERCENT). MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 80. MIN HUMIDITY........42 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS 13 TO 15 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........4 FEET. .FORECAST DAYS 3 THROUGH 5... .SUNDAY... MOSTLY CLEAR. LOWS IN THE MID 60S. HIGHS IN THE UPPER 70S. NORTHEAST WINDS AROUND 13 MPH. .MONDAY... PARTLY CLOUDY. LOWS IN THE UPPER 60S. HIGHS IN THE LOWER 80S. EAST WINDS AROUND 9 MPH. .TUESDAY... PARTLY CLOUDY. LOWS IN THE LOWER 70S. HIGHS IN THE LOWER 80S. EAST WINDS AROUND 10 MPH. $$ FORECASTER...RUA REQUESTED BY...KENT KUYPER TYPE OF REQUEST...HAZMAT .TAG 20080925.HURRI.02/LCH NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE: for Safety, for Work, for Fun - FOR LIFE [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR HURRICANE IKE SURVEY...NWS NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LAKE CHARLES LA 228 PM CDT TUE OCT 28 2008 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE. .DISCUSSION... HIGH PRESSURE WILL BE IN CONTROL OF THE WEATHER FOR THE NEXT FEW DAYS. THE RESULT WILL BE LOW HUMIDITY VALUES...NO CHANCE FOR RAIN...AND COOL TEMPERATURES. .TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........CLEAR (0-5 PERCENT). MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 52. MAX HUMIDITY........77 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS AROUND 9 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........4 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........2 FEET. TIME (CDT) 6PM 7PM 8PM 9PM 10P 11P MID 1AM 2AM 3AM 4AM 5AM SKY (%).........0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 WEATHER COV..... WEATHER TYPE.... TEMP............64 61 59 58 56 56 55 55 54 54 54 53 RH..............41 41 46 50 56 60 61 65 68 69 72 73 EYE LVL WND DIR.NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE EYE LVL WND SPD.6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 6 6 EYE LVL WND GST.15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 10 WAVE PERIOD(S)..4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 WAVE HEIGHT(FT).2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 .WEDNESDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY (0-10 PERCENT). MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 70. MIN HUMIDITY........47 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....EAST WINDS 7 TO
Hurricane Ike made landfall during the early morning hours of Sept. 13, 2008, in the Galveston/Houston area of Texas as a Category Two/Three Hurricane (~110mph winds). Storm surge was 20-25ft in some areas. There was severe wind, storm surge and flooding damage in large regions of Texas. The USCG, FEMA, and National Guard personnel are responding. This ResponseLINK Hotline has been established to provide general updates and aid in providing NOAA products to other state and federal agencies during the preparation and expected post-landfall emergency response. Any specific incidents that NOAA’s Office of Response and Restoration (ORR) responds to would likely generate a separate Hotline Account with Ike as a prefix. [SEP] signed off 9/27/08. Facility tanks missing. TCEQ will continue to monitor photo, USCG [SEP] photo, NOAA [SEP] release at small tank farm. Cleanup complete and signed off Oct 2 2008. photo USCG [SEP] Damaged Vessel Assessment Area Map [SEP] The map depicts the active pollution cases along with EPA's 2-minute grid which has been updated based on the presence/absence of bird nesting sites within each grid cell. [SEP] Bravo Branch in Port Arthur is downsizing ESF10 removal activities as pollution cases are all signed off with the exception of a few minor monitoring and passive collection issues. USCG Strike Team members are shifting focus towards support of EPA's orphaned container recovery operations. The NOAA Scientific Support Team will demob tomorrow. All pollution case files and other documentation is now being managed by the local MSU with Strike Team assistance. NOAA Personnel on scene: Bradford Benggio, SSC William Holton, Info Mgt Spec. [SEP] NOAA assisted with two field assessments today along with USFWS, TGLO, and USCG: 1. HOPE On the over flight of 30 SEPT, recoverable quantities of light crude were observed in the marsh pond SW of the tank farm at the Houston Oil Production Enterprises (HOPE) site. On 1 OCT, NOAA accompanied USCG FOSCR, TGLO and USFWS to HOPE facility and consulted with RP and OSRO on clean up tactics. The agreed upon response strategy involves staking a line of absorbent boom to contain oil along the SW shoreline of the pond and placing absorbent pads inside of boom to facilitate passive recovery of oil. Boom will be deployed by jon boat with minimal to no impact on the marsh. OSRO will check pads and replace them as necessary to continue passive recovery. Vac truck operations will continue to recovery oil in and around tank farm. Response progress will be monitored again on OCT 2 or 3. 2. Rainbow bridge: On OCT 1, NOAA examined tank in ICW at Rainbow bridge in Port Arthur and met with USCG and contractor to discuss removal operations. The contractor will approach that tank at high tide on OCT 2 and determine if the tank contains petroleum products and will maintain boom around tank during operations. Contractor will ensure that all valves on the tank are closed and will tow the tank to a public boat launch W of the bridge. No dredging will be required to remove tank. Contractor will submit a full recovery plan to USCG in the morning of OCT 2. Tomorrow NOAA will asseist with assessments at PAPCO. USFWS will depart Port Arthur tomorrow morning but will provide further input and contact/coordination details prior to leaving. NOAA will work to develop a final documentation strategy for the responses and cases under the USCG MA at Port Arthur. EPA and USCG leads are still discussing final documentation needs and formats needed. This will be addressed tomorrow at a meeting in Pasadena. During this meeting, there will also be discussion of the marsh recovery plan and required permitting to access wetlands and remove orphaned containers such as drums and tanks. Port Arthur SSC and EPA lead will participate in this meeting. Port Arthur was visited today by the Port Arthur MSU COTP, and EPA regional directors for Superfund and Emergency Response. NOAA Personnel On-scene: Bradford Benggio: SSC Carl Childs: Env Chemist William Holton: Info Mgt Spec. [SEP] photo, NOAA [SEP] SSC Port Arthur Evening Report: 2300h, 21Sep08 by Jim Jeansonne, SSC EPA, USCG, TGLO, and TCEQ continuing to sort out roles and responsibilities as they stand up the combined ESF-10 Port Arthur Branch. Discussions included delineating boundaries, assessment/ops teams makeup and which contractors would be the OSRO. EPA (Eric Delgado) is the FOSC, CG (Lt Pete Zauner, Strike Team rep) is Deputy. Port Arthur Branch coordinating pollution response for Jefferson and Orange Co., TX only. Branch attempting to transition from separate CG and EPA databases to EPA database, and finding challenges in doing so (to prevent loss of operational picture that CG is familiar with). Branch isn???€?t using a full ICS structure, just a part of it. Potential ISB in two parts of the J.D. Murphree Wildlife Management Area ???€? SSC accompanied TGLO SOSC (Buzz Martin) and TX NRDA team on assessment of the 2 spill areas (Square Mile Energy (SME) and Petrogas) via land and airboat. ???€? SME facility area is completely flooded and mostly gone. Oil residual in area is a thin orange sheen with some thicker orange mousse. One impoundment area (described as the ???€?Mottled Duck nesting habitat???€? by TPWL rep) just south of facility (estimated 100 acres) had variously 10% to 80% thin sheen (orange to dull grey) coverage. Marsh area covered by 8-12???€? of water. Vegetation above water damaged, but plants themselves should survive. Still determining if burning is best method to remove oil residue to minimize impact to waterfowl and prevent exposure of hunters during the upcoming October season. Other impoundment areas (impoundments 2, 3, and 4) that were assessed had either no observed oil or only a few small pockets of sheen/mousse. ???€? Petrogas facility itself was covered by a layer of water 2 to 6 inches deep. Dark brown oil (probably crude) floating in secondary containment. Estimated by TGLO as 2-5 BBL total. No evidence of cleanup or containment operations at site (no personnel at site at all) when we were there. Facility needs containment and cleanup to prevent additional exposure of surrounding habitat, which currently seems in relatively good condition, although flooded by about 12???€? of part salt water. Only a dozen or so small pockets (5???€?x 20???€? typical) of sheen-mousse blown against vegetation and berms. Housing situation for any new NOAA personnel ???€? Trailers, shared by up to 4 CG, provide your own linen, towels and other housekeeping items. Hotel space in area is being investigated, but reported by CG logistics to not be available. Additional NOAA personnel would be assigned by CG to share trailer with SSC, unless their own lodging is found. NOAA personnel on-scene: SSC (Jeansonne) Plans for 22Sep08: Continue standing up combined EPA-CG-TX ESF-10 Branch Command in Port Arthur, establishing information displays, determining NOAA personnel future needs, and coordinating grids and databases with other ESF-10 branches. [SEP] Cleanup completed and signed off 9/30/08 photo, USCG [SEP] Tank in waterway. EPA will remove under tank removal plan. USCG will monitor for pollution threat. Estimate removal operation will be completed by 08 Oct 2008. photo, NOAA [SEP] Response is a salvage issue. USCG monitoring in case of any pollution. photo, USCG
At approximately 1330 Friday, there was a release of about 50 barrels of  diesel fuel oil spilled into the southern end of San Juan Harbor, Puerto Rico. That location is at the southern end of San Juan Harbor, in the "Army Terminal Turning Basin". It is reported that there is power plant cooling water intake/outfall nearby that causes a significant current. The intake is currently boomed off. [SEP] Date: Saturday, September 13, 2008 0330 AST To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Diesel pipeline spill in San Juan Harbor, Puerto Rico. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: At approximately 1330 Friday, there was a release of about 50 barrels of diesel fuel oil spilled into the southern end of San Juan Harbor, Puerto Rico. The reported location is 18d-25'40"N--66d-06'27"W. That location is at the southern end of San Juan Harbor, in the "Army Terminal Turning Basin". It is reported that there is power plant cooling water intake/outfall nearby that causes a significant current. The intake is currently boomed off. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Overnight: East winds 9 to 14 knots. Seas 2 To 3 feet. Saturday: East northeast winds 12 to 17 knots. seas 1 to 3 feet. Saturday Night: East northeast winds 8 to 13 knots. Seas 2 feet. Sunday: East winds 8 to 13 knots. Seas 2 feet or less. 2) Trajectory Analysis Diesel fuel is a fairly light oil that tends to evaporate and disperse fairly quickly. We expect that the currents in the region are small, so any sheen that does persist will tend to move downwind, possibly causing staining of any impacted shorelines, but little persistent impacts. With the forecast winds from the east and east northeast, we expect the sheen to move to the west and west southwest, effecting the shoreline on the western shore of the Army terminal turning basin. We expect most of the sheen to remain near the Army terminal pier. If there is significant turbulence from the cooling water intake/outfall in the vicinity of the sheen, this could serve to disperse some of the oil into the water column a bit faster, perhaps resulting in the intake water being effected. 3) Oil Fate NOAA's Adios2 model predicts that 90% of the oil will be evaporated or dispersed within about 12 hours. If the diesel is contained in boom, or under piers, etc, it could persist longer. [SEP] Brad, I just retuned from the scene and the new stimates from my guys on scene appear to be between 5 - 10 bbls of diesel on the water. Most was contained; and RP has picked up most of what can be recoverd...the rest appears to be burnig off quickly. Currently we have a helo up on an overflight of the area making sure product did not drift into an area we might have missed. LCDR Ric Alonso is my POC. As always, thanks for your great support. Vr, Capt E. Pino Commander Sector San Juan
At 0840-PDT NOAA was informed by NOAA ICC that the M/V ANTALINA was disabled approximately 114nm SE of Galveston, TX.  M/V ANTALINA is a 585ft bulk cargo carrier fully loaded with 11,280 metric tons of green petroleum coke.  No information on the amount of fuel in its bunkers is known.  There are 21 crewmembers aboard.  The vessel is in scheduled communications with the USCG.  The ship was reported to be at position 28 03.1'N, 093 11.7'W and drifting SW.  The ship has lost propulsion but not ship's power. [SEP] From ICC, Unclassified. [SEP] NOTE: As of 1400 Friday, no one has asked for this, but just in case, here it is. TIME: 1400 CDT Friday, September 12, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: M/V Antalina For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ We have looked at trajectory implications of a potential release from the disabled ship, M/V Antalina. At 0840-PDT NOAA was informed by NOAA ICC that the M/V Antalina was disabled approximately 114nm SE of Galveston, TX. M/V Antalina is a 585ft bulk cargo carrier fully loaded with 11,280 metric tons of green petroleum coke. No information on the amount of fuel in its bunkers is known. The ship was reported to be at position 28 03.1'N, 093 11.7'W and drifting SW. The ship has lost propulsion but not ship's power. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: That location was within the Hurricane-strength radius of Hurricane Ike at the time of the report, and the ship will likely remain within the Hurricane for some time. It will encounter very strong winds and large seas for about 18 hours before the hurricane moves ashore. 2) TRAJECTORY AND OIL FATE: The cargo is a Petroleum Coke, which a not particularly hazardous solid. The physical characteristics of petroleum coke are similar to coal dust and spilled coke would be expected to behave the same as spilled coal dust. The material that was released would likely form floating mats on the water surface, although some of the material would form dust clouds in the upper water layer. With the storm conditions, we expect the mats would be broken up rapidly, sinking in the vicinity of the release. The ship is carrying an unknown quantity of fuel oil, though it could be a substantial amount, given the size of the vessel. If the fuel were released in the hurricane, it would be broken up and widely dispersed by the severe winds and waves. After the storm, it is unlikely that the resulting widely scattered tarballs would be observable or have significant environmental effects. [SEP] As per USCG briefing on 09/14/2008: Both vessel and crew survived Hurricane Ike intact and without incident. M/V ANTALINA is operating under its own power and will make way for Port Arthur at first light on 14 SEP under escort by TUG SMITH ROTTERDAM. This will serve as a final report for this incident. [SEP] Petroleum coke (often abbreviated petcoke) is a carbonaceous solid derived from oil refinery coker units or other cracking processes. Other coke has traditionally been derived from coal. More data can be found about the substance from the MSDS here: http://www.marathonpetroleum.com/content/documents/mpc/msds/0109MAR019.pdf Petcoke is a fuel produced using the byproducts of the petroleum refining process. Crude oil must be refined to produce gasoline and other products. A residue is left over from this process that can be further refined by ???€?coking???€? it at high temperatures and under great pressure. The resulting product is petcoke, a hard substance that is similar to coal. Petcoke, like coal, is used by other electric utilities such as JEA and Lakeland. Petcoke has a much higher heating value than coal, at around 14,000 Btu per pound, compared with 12,500 Btu per pound for coal. The physical characteristics of petroleum coke are similar to coal dust and spilled coke would be expected to behave the same as spilled coal dust. We would not anticipate that all of the material would leak out, even with a significant hull breach. The material that was released would likely form floating mats on the water surface, although some of the material would form dust clouds in the upper water layer. The mats would be broken up over time by wave action. Given the approaching hurricane, this could be a quite rapid process. Petroleum coke does not weather rapidly. Only minute amounts would evaporate or dissolve into the water column. Biodegradation would also be very slow. Petroleum coke is also, relative to other petroleum products, not very toxic, although it does contain small amounts of heavy metals and PAH's. Compiled by Mark Dix, Deputy Chief, ERD
Hurricane Ike made landfall during the early morning hours of Sept. 13, 2008, in the Galveston/Houston area of Texas as a Category Two/Three Hurricane (~110mph winds).  Storm surge was 20-25ft in some areas.  There is severe wind, storm surge and flooding damage in large regions of Texas. USCG, FEMA, EPA, and National Guard personnel are responding. [SEP] Photo by NOAA. [SEP] Photo courtesy USCG. [SEP] Photo: NOAA/ERD [SEP] Pollution Threats [SEP] Photo by NOAA. [SEP] 9/16 1700 Evening Brief 43 ISO containers have been identified near Greens Bayou washed up on the Kinder Morgan and Mega Fleet facilities. These are mixed hazmat containers. Some have IDs for cyanide, explosive, and several unknown. A private contractor has been hired to perform the removal. They are in the process of developing a removal plan. Initial facility inspections of all facilities should be tomorrow. Salvage operations in the Houston Ship Channel should begin tomorrow. Field reports of pollution sites are in the process of just coming in and will be available for the morning brief. [SEP] Unified Command Established for Post-Hurricane Ike Pollution Response PASADENA, Texas - Four federal and state agencies established a unified command here Monday to efficiently coordinate efforts to contain and clean up oil and hazardous materials in the wake of Hurricane Ike. Members of the Environmental Protection Agency, Coast Guard, Texas General Land Office and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality comprise the Unified Command. Field workers from these agencies are working with local agencies to assess, contain and clean up spills and hazardous materials. The Unified Command are responding according to federal guidelines in Emergency Support Function (ESF) #10. This provides an outline for federal support and management of various spill sites to minimize their impact on the public and the environment. In addition to detailing the roles of federal agencies, it promotes close coordination with state, local and industry representatives to establish priorities and goals for response. Field personnel have identified 181 sites with reports of pollution in the Houston-Galveston area. Teams are assessing pollution sites in the Port Arthur area and will have a count of the pollution sites there later Monday. Date: Sept. 22, 2008 Contact: Public Information Office (252) 267-3662 Members of the public can report oil spills or displaced hazardous materials by contacting the National Response Center at (800) 424-8802. The public should report oiled or injured wildlife by calling Texas Parks & Wildlife at (281) 842-8100. Editor's note: More specific descriptions of the oil and hazardous material sites are forthcoming. For more information, contact the Public Information Office at (252) 267-3662 or (252) 267-4811. [SEP] Pollution Cases 9-15-08, Houston [SEP] NGS Aerial Survey Photo (credit, NOAA). [SEP] Evening Report Hurricane IKE, Houston Sept. 29, 2008 Marsh Recovery Plan Coordination Meeting SSCs Henry, Benggio & Lehmann met in Port Arthur, along with EPA, TGLO and USCG, to coordinate on future operations to extradite large debris from marshes and wetlands (reference recent photograph: ???€?Energy Reserve Group???€? for an example of such debris). The basis of the plan will be the documents developed in response to hurricanes Katrina and Rita by NOAA/ORR and others. Future actions associated with this item ???€? A meeting on Thursday afternoon in the Pasadena Command Post with key players to work through the plan and future actions. ???€? Coordination with key approval authorities, including Army Corps of Engineers, TGLO, TCEQ and others. ???€? Interrogate the EPA Response Manager database for point data on large debris (likely only tanks or parts of tanks) to be exported and overlain on TX ESI shape files, looking for a better understanding of where such debris is in marsh and other sensitive habitat. ???€? Obtain examples of marsh extractions and the associated equipment for operations and planning Sites Several sites have requested final sign-off treatment. In that vain, TGLO and the SSC will finalize a list of sites that require UC representative inspection tomorrow and a sign-off method for the others. In addition, the FOSC and the SSC will do a site visit at the request of the Recovery Unit to help deal with several specific issues. Future Jill Bodnar will demob Tuesday evening and return to normal life on Wednesday George Graettinger will arrive Tuesday and continue as the Info. Management Specialist on the NOAA Science Team On Scene Steve Lehmann, SSC Jill Bodnar, Information Management Special Extraordinaire [SEP] MODU GNOME runs [SEP] 43 ISO containers have been identified near Greens Bayou washed up on the Kinder Morgan and Mega Fleet facilities. These are mixed hazmat containers. Some have IDs for cyanide, explosive, and several unknown. A private contractor has been hired to perform the removal. They are in the process of developing a removal plan.
At approximately 1000 (CDT) an USCG overflight reported a 50 yd x 50 yd patch of oil around a tank battery in NW Breton Sound, LA with sheen extending for 1 mile-no direction given.  Initial estimate is 20 bbls of crude oil. ERD was contacted to provide oil spill trajectory information. [SEP] (credit, USCG) [SEP] (credit, USCG) [SEP] (credit, USCG) [SEP] GUSTAV-TANK BATTERY, NW BRETON SOUND, LA Friday 1145 CDT, September 05, 2008 Sunset (09/05): 1917 Sunrise (09/06): 0640 Sunset (09/06): 1916 Forecast Winds: Today: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Tonight: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds from the W at 5-10 knots. Saturday night: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots. Sunday: winds from the NW at 5-10 knots. Sunday night: : winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Monday: variable at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Tonight: slight chance of showers and thunderstorms. Saturday: mostly clear and sunny. Saturday night: mostly clear. Sunday: mostly clear and sunny. Sunday night: mostly clear. Monday: mostly clear and sunny Seas: Today: seas 1-2 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Tonight: seas 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Saturday: seas 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Saturday night: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Sunday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Sunday night: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Monday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs near 90 to lows in the upper 70???€?s. [SEP] http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=76010&d=7&dt=S [SEP] Date; Sept. 3, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Breton Sound Spill FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: An overflight at about 1000 CDT reported a slick in the northern section of Breton Sound near where MRGO enters the Sound. The reported coordinates are 29?? 25.40'N by 89?? 56.48'W. A 50 yd by 50 yd patch of dark oil was reported along with a 1 mile sheen which originated from a tank battery. The estimate spille estimate was 20 bbls. See attached map. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Today: winds from the SE at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Friday: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis With moderate winds from the SE we expect any persistent slick to impact The area of Helena Bay with potential of oil getting back into Lake Machias and Lake Fortuna. The water level in MRGO has been dropping and appears to be almost back to pre hurricane levels. http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=76010&d=7&dt=S [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Map [SEP] (credit, USCG) [SEP] Breton Sound Forecast Wednesday 1130 CDT, September 03, 2008 Sunset (09/03): 1920 Sunrise (09/04): 0639 Sunset (09/04): 1919 Forecast Winds: Today: winds from the SE at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Friday: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Tonight: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday night: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Friday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Saturday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Seas: Today: seas 2-4 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Tonight: seas 1-3 feet, light chop in protected waters. Thursday: seas 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Thursday night: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Friday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Saturday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the upper 80???€?s to lows in the upper 70???€?s.
At 1000 (CDT) a USCG overflight reported a well head in Barataria Bay, LA spraying gas/oil condensate.  Volume unknown. RP unknown.  ERD contacted to provide trajectory information. [SEP] Map [SEP] Date; Sept. 3, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Well blowout in Barataria Bay FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: An overflight at about 1000 CDT reported a well blowout in the upper section of Barataria Bay. There is a brown slick reported with the blowout. The location was reported at 29?? 25.40'N by 89?? 56.48'W. See attached map If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Today: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots shifting to NW at 5-10. Friday: winds from the NE at 5-10 knots becoming SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis With moderate winds from the S We would expect a slick to trend to the North with potential impacts to St Mary's Point and slicks that could enter the bayou on both sides of the St Mary's Point. The water level in Barataria Bay continues to drop and with above normal runoff we do not expect any oil that persists long enough to threaten the marshes to penetrate significantly into the marshes over the next 2 days. http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=82875&d=7&dt=S How far the oil travels will depend upon the type of oil an how much oil is being lost. At this point these are both unknowns. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=82875&d=7&dt=S [SEP] BARATARIA BAY, LA Wednesday 1130 CDT, September 03, 2008 Sunset (09/03): 1920 Sunrise (09/04): 0639 Sunset (09/04): 1919 Forecast Winds: Today: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots shifting to NW at 5-10. Friday: winds from the NE at 5-10 knots becoming SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Tonight: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday night: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Friday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Saturday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Seas: Today: seas 2-4 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Tonight: seas 1-3 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Thursday: seas 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Thursday night: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Friday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Saturday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the upper 80???€?s to lows in the upper 70???€?s.
A ResponseLink Hotline has been established to provide general updates and aid in providing NOAA products to other state and federal agencies during the expected post-landfall emergency response.  Any specific incidents that NOAA’s Office of Response and Restoration (ORR) responds to would likely generate a separate Hotline Account with Gustav as a prefix. [SEP] These photographs (3 total) were taken by the Captain on board the tug Mississippi (from the wheelhouse) looking down on the tugs Mardi Gras and Providence at Darrow Fleet MM 175. These tugs were tied to a fleet barge that was stationed at mile 175. THAT's RIGHT MM 175 -- DONALDSONVILLE (just South of Baton Rouge LA). Photo credit is provide above. [SEP] Map of Incident Status 29SEP08 [SEP] Map and chart of Incident spill information, 17SEP08 [SEP] Map of Incident Status, 15 Sep [SEP] Note, this map will require some updating, but it does reflect the information known on 6 Sept. (credit, NOAA). [SEP] Brief Summary of Activities: USCG Sector New Orleans, which includes MSU Baton Rouge, MSD Houma, MSU Morgan City, and Sector New Orlean's primary AOR, remains evacuated to Natchez, MS. All reports are being fielded at the Command Post in Natchez for now. There have only been a limited number of pollution cases received: 3 pollution reports yesterday and 3 today. A brief summary follows: 1 Sept. Partially sunk tug at the ACL Harahan Fleet at MM 107 LDB; NOLA Tiger team confirmed no pollution & ACL hired an OSRO to mitigate the situation. An AST in Michoud releasing a white cloud gas; notified LA State Troopers; nothing further reported. A tug leaking fuel possibly affecting St. Bernard Water Intake, USCG Tiger team investigated and no pollution observed. 2 Sept. Rainbow sheen reported around a 120' construction barge on its side at MM50 of MRGO near RDB. Waterways Group is working to ID owner. A natural gas well head leak was reported 5-10 miles north of Venice. USCG continues to investigate source and ID RP. A sheen was reported in the West Bay Area. CG overflight is trying to determine extent of sheen; investigation pends. NOAA ORR remains in position to support if requested. A ORR conference call was conducted to review current and projected support activities. NOAA Home Team staff have been working in the background to identify satellite imagery, facility information, and damage assessment products. NOAA Away Team staff have been identified, and only await tasking. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) remains in Baton Rouge, and plans to spend part of Wednesday at the JFO. ESF-10 Mission Assignment Status: FEMA will not approve a request for ESF-10 USCG and EPA technical support from anyone except the state, and that request has not yet been made. The EPA is planning to meet with Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality on Wednesday, and this is one of the topics. If a ESF-10 Mission is tasked, there would probably a request for NOAA support. Additional Information: Despite the impact of Hurricane Gustav to the infrastructure of Baton Rouge and SE Louisiana (more than 80% of Baton Rouge remains without power and recovery is expected to be very slow). Communication are fairly good and the SSC is able to maintain web access by charging the portable computer battery using an inverter and car battery. Without the use of the cellular internet access card, communication would have been significantly limited. Having a cellular phone from outside the affected area also seems to be a plus. Personal: Day two without electricity, which means no air conditioning. A 8:00 PM to 6:00 curfew remains in effect. That said, I???€?m safe and secure with plenty of food, water, and work to do. If no power by tomorrow, the frozen food will be frozen no more. It would then be time to burn some charcoal and feast. Thanks to all of the staff for the preparation and hard work to date. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] An incident specific Regional Response Team (RRT) conference call was conducted for informational exchange only. This call focused only on preidentified Emergency Support Function (ESF) activities related to Hazardous Material and Oil Spills (ESF-10). The only ESF-10 Mission Assignment at present has been to staff key EPA positions at different command centers such as the Joint Field Office (JFO) in Baton Rouge, LA. The EPA has additional staff available to respond as needed, and they are currently evaluating the best locations for a Forward Operating Base (FOB). The USCG D8 office is planning to return to New Orleans from St. Louis MO as early as Wednesday. USCG Sector New Orleans (SEC NOLA), is currently operating out of Natchez MS and is expected to return to New Orleans as early as Wednesday. The Commanding Officer (CO) for SEC NOLA has identified the Gulf Strike Team CO as the Federal On-Scene Coordinator???€?s Representative (FOSCR) for any ESF-10 or pollution related response issues. As weather allows, the USCG is conducting post-storm assessments. The general posture is to wait until the storm has passed, and then respond with preidentified resources. Note, after Hurricane Katrina has immediately passed, we were optimistic that that New Orleans had dodged the storm, shortly afterwards came the realization of the breached levees and the city flooded. The point being, even though plans to return to home bases may suggest that things are not that bad, it is far to early to make any real assessments. Still, we hope for the best???€? as we continue to prepare for the worse. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] Earlier photograph provided by LDEQ. [SEP] (credit, NOAA) [SEP] Map of Incident Status, 15 SEP 08 Version 2 [SEP] (credit, NOAA) [SEP] (Credit, NOAA)
During the early morning hours of Thursday, 28 August 2008, the NOAA ERD HAZMAT Duty Officer was notified of an allision in Bolivar Roads.  The regional Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified and provided the support requested by USCG MSU Galveston.  The report was that a tow containing two red flagged barges had an illision with a stationary barge.  The actual details were unknown, but there was damage reported, but no release. [SEP] Position reported by USCG (image credit, Google). [SEP] Reported Situation Allision involving a tow with two red flag barges. One barge is reported to be carrying Crude Oil and the second Naphtha. There is reported damage to at least one of the barges, but the is no report of a release at present. The USCG has requested an initial trajectory and brief RAR. Initial Trajectory Analysis and Concerns The reported position shows the barges located in he ICW approximately 3 miles from the Port Bolivar entrance. Given the current winds, any release would initially slowly moved to the NE impacting the N side of the waterway toward Johnson Road. Once tide begins to drop in the afternoon, any pollution would be expected to move back toward the SW toward the Port Bolivar and toward the main Galveston Channel. A small spill should be largely contained with the ICW. Report any observed release to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator to initiate a review and update of this trajectory based on known observations. Both products, Crude Oil and Naphtha, are flammable liquids that would float on the surface of the water. If there is a significant release, or release into an exposed void, use caution to not create a potential ignition. Air monitoring would be initially required to insure safe exposure levels for both LEL and benzene should there be damage to the Crude Oil cargo or a significant release. Naphtha is a distillate cut of crude oil in the light to medium range and generally doesn???€?t persist long in the environment due to evaporative loss. While natural resources do utilize the ICW as a feeding area, the greater abundance of natural resources outside the waterway would be of greater risk. Any release should be contained with the ICW, if it can be done safely. Tides Forecast The area is currently in a flood tide condition and will ebb (drop) in the afternoon evening. The tides are currently a mixed semidiurnal so the will be some slight changes throughout the morning. The next true low tide is forecast for after 9:00 PM local time. Current Wx Observations The NOAA Weather Buoy Station 42035 is currently showing SSW winds at less than 10 mph. The PORT system is consistent with this observation. Initial Weather Forecast Thursday Day: Light winds, 5 to 10 out of the W becoming S winds at 5-10 mph are forecasted. Today: A 20 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms after 1pm. Partly cloudy, with a high near 91. Heat index values as high as 101. Thursday Night: A slight chance of showers and thunderstorms before 10pm, then isolated showers and thunderstorms after 1am. Partly cloudy, with a low around 79. Southeast wind around 10 mph. Chance of precipitation is 20%. Friday: A 30 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms, mainly after 1pm. Partly cloudy, with a high near 91. Heat index values as high as 102. North wind around 5 mph becoming east. [SEP] USCG inspectors and investigators visited the barge. No pollution or threat of pollution was reported.
T.S. Fay made landfall on the south coast of Florida on August 18, 2008.  At approximately 1530 EST, the USCG requested the SSC to provide forecast and real-time river flood status information for FL, GA, and SC.
At approximately 1530 EST on Aug.13, 2008, the M/V Island Intrepid, a 279ft. general cargo container, has run hard aground on a coral ledge in the entrance to the Port of Miami ("Government Cut").  Location: 25deg45.874N, 080deg08.014W. Steering failure has been reported as the cause.  The vessel is holed and taking on water, but no release of fuel or cargo has occurred. USCG Sector Miami notified NOAA ERD at approximately 1115 EST on 14Aug requesting a worst case oil spill trajectory for a potential spill of 72 MT (~23,000 gals) of diesel fuel. [SEP] Photo credit: Channel 7 News, Miami [SEP] Spot Forecast for MV/Island Intrepid 1230 EDT, August 14, 2008 Sunrise/Sunset: Thursday August 14: Sunset: 1957 EDT Friday August 15: Sunrise: 0654 EDT Sunset: 1956 EDT _____________________________ Winds: Thursday afternoon: Winds from the SE at 10 - 15 knots Thursday night: Winds from the S at 5 knots Friday: Winds from the S to SE at 5 - 10 knots Sea State: Thursday: 2 - 3 foot range in the channel and 2 - 4 feet on the outer coast Thursday night: 1 - 2 feet in the channel Friday: 1 - 2 feet in the channel, smooth in the intercoastal waterway Precipitation: Thursday: A slight chance of showers and thundershowers this afternoon Thursday night: Chance of isolated showers and thundershowers Friday: Increasing chance of showers and Thundershowers Extended outlook: A tropical wave in the Caribbean, along the northern Leeward Islands could develop further and impact the Miami area by early next week. [SEP] Tidal Currents at MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE, Government Cut, MIAMI HARBOR Station No. 8216 Meter Depth: 16 feet Latitude: 25?? 45.90' N Longitude: 80?? 8.17' W Maximum Flood Direction: 293?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 112?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood 00:00 Flood 00:00 Minimum Before Ebb 00:00 Ebb 00:00 Flood Speed Ratio: 1.0 Ebb Speed Ratio: 1.0 Based on MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Thu Aug 14, 2008 to Sat Aug 16, 2008 (3 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 08/14/2008 00:36 -1.2 Max Ebb Thu 02:41 -0.0 Min Before Flood 06:11 +1.2 Max Flood 08:21 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 12:45 -1.4 Max Ebb 14:58 -0.0 Min Before Flood 18:36 +1.6 Max Flood 21:06 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 08/15/2008 01:18 -1.3 Max Ebb Fri 03:27 -0.0 Min Before Flood 06:51 +1.4 Max Flood 09:08 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 13:23 -1.5 Max Ebb 15:43 -0.0 Min Before Flood 19:10 +1.7 Max Flood 21:46 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 08/16/2008 01:49 -1.4 Max Ebb Sat 04:09 -0.0 Min Before Flood 07:17 +1.6 Max Flood 09:54 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 13:49 -1.5 Max Ebb 16:26 -0.0 Min Before Flood 19:27 +1.8 Max Flood 22:25 +0.1 Min Before Ebb [SEP] 1615 EDT, Brad called and said the vessel has been successfully refloated without spilling any oil. It is headed to berth 5. Case closed for us. [SEP] USCG Press Release 14Aug08 [SEP] Tidal Heights at MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (GOVERNMENT CUT), East Coast, FLORIDA Station No. 3481 Latitude: 25?? 45.80' N Longitude: 80?? 7.80' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water 00:00 Low Water 00:00 High water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Based on MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Thu Aug 14, 2008 to Sat Aug 16, 2008 (3 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Highest Tide - Sat Aug 16, 2008; 09:25 pm; 2.6ft Lowest Tide - Sat Aug 16, 2008; 02:43 pm; 0.1ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 08/14/2008 01:07 +0.6 Low Thu 07:24 +2.3 High 13:22 +0.2 Low 20:05 +2.4 High ------------------------------------------------------- 08/15/2008 01:50 +0.5 Low Fri 08:12 +2.4 High 14:03 +0.2 Low 20:46 +2.6 High ------------------------------------------------------- 08/16/2008 02:29 +0.4 Low Sat 08:56 +2.5 High 14:43 +0.1 Low 21:25 +2.6 High [SEP] Grounded on North side of channel with 72 MT (23,000 gallons) of diesel. [SEP] Date: August 14, 2008. 1400 EDT To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio/ USCG Chief Paillacar FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential spill from M/V Island Intrepid FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The M/V Island Intrepid has grounded along the north side of the entrance to Miami Harbor. The location is reported to be 25?? 45.87' N by 080?? 8.014'W. The hull has been breeched but the fuel tank is intact and no oil has been spilled. The vessel is reported to have about 72 metric tons (23,000 gallons) of diesel fuel onboard. The plan is to pull the vessel free at the 2000 high tide tonight (Aug 14). If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast This afternoon: Winds from the SE at 10 - 15 knots Tonight : Winds from the S at 5 knots Tomorrow: Winds from the S to SE at 5 - 10 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis Should a spill of 23,000 gallons occur at 2000 - 2100 EDT tonight: Expect a slick to enter the Port of Miami and move downwind to the NNW for the first 2 - 3 hours of the spill. A sheen could extend as far as the Julia Tuttle Causeway if the winds persist at 10 - 15 knots. As the tidal currents ebb and the winds decrease later in the evening, a sheen would extend out of the channel and into the nearshore coastal waters by 1 or 2 AM Friday. With winds predicted from the S at 5 knots, we anticipate shoreline impacts along the north side of the channel and a sheen that would extend to the NNE for about 2 - 3 miles outside of the channel. By sunrise Friday morning, expect sheens within the Port of Miami from Dodge Island to the Julia Tuttle Causeway. Light sheens could extend north of the Causeway for about a mile. The main channel will have sheens, primarily along the northern half. Outside along coastal waters most of the sheen would be dispersed but there could be some scattered sheens north of the entrance for 2 - 3 miles. 3) Oil Fate A visible sheen within the Intercoastal Waterway will persist for about 24 - 48 hours depending upon how the oil collects along the shoreline and the wind conditions. Along the outer coast, a visible sheen would persist for 12 - 24 hours. [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = 2 ft Water Temperature = 80 deg F Time of Initial Release = August 14, 1000 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 72.0 metric tonnes ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill metric ton percent percent percent 1 72.0 - 4 - 0 - 96 2 72.0 8 1 91 4 72.0 - 17 - 5 - 78 6 72.0 26 13 62 8 72.0 - 32 - 23 - 45 10 72.0 36 32 32 12 72.0 - 38 - 39 - 23 14 72.0 39 45 16 16 72.0 - 40 - 49 - 12 18 72.0 40 51 8 [SEP] Water level is about 4 - 5 inches higher than predicted but the phase is right on as predicted.
On Friday, 8 August 2008, USCG MSU Galveston notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a pipeline leak near Dickerson Bay in Texas. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Dickinson Bayou I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on August 8, 2008. Information in the report is based on a release of an unknown quantity of crude oil from a pipeline near Dickinson Bayou. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers Dickinson Bayou and Dickinson Bay. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material Assuming the oil is a crude oil, the product is expected coat the vegetation and intertidal organisms. There may also be a water-soluble component that could have an impact on subtidal organisms. If the release is in the marsh, as indicated by the initial report, there may be coating of the marsh sediments. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline of Dickinson Bay and Bayou is a mix of marshes, sheltered scarps, exposed scarps in clay, gravel beaches, exposed riprap, and seawalls. In the marshes the oil will coat the vegetation and possibly the sediments. The extent of sediment oiling will depend on water levels in the marsh and water level changes over time. Coating the vegetation will result in short-term impacts to the marsh with possible die-off of the vegetation this year. Oiled sediments can result in chronic, long-term, impacts including loss of marsh vegetation. On the clay scarps oil will typically not adhere to the wet sediment surfaces, but could penetrate root cavities if present and dry. On the exposed scarps the oil will typically not persist for any length of time. The riprap may be coated by the oil with accumulations in the cavities between the rocks. This accumulated oil can result in chronic sheening. The gravel beaches, composed mostly of shell, are very porous. Oil may coat the porous shells and penetrate into the sediments. If oiled, cleanup may require removal of all oiled shell material. In the sheltered areas formation of asphalt pavements are likely where accumulation is heavy. Seawalls may be coated by the oil. Areas of light oiling may leave a band at the high water line while areas of heavier oiling may coat most of the intertidal zone. V. Biological Resources at Risk The only endangered species in the area is the Atwater???€?s prairie chicken which may be found about a mile south of Dickinson Bayou. Fish - Numerous species of fish are present in the area. Dickinson Bay is a nursery area for fish; Gulf killifish, hardhead catfish, sheepshead minnow, spotted seatrout, red drum, and bay anchovy may be spawning in the bay at this time. Other larval and juvenile fish present include Atlantic croaker, southern flounder, sand seatrout, and striped mullet. Larval and juvenile life stages are the most sensitive to oil impacts. In addition they may be in shallow water and are more likely to be exposed to lethal and sublethal concentrations of oil in the water column. Shellfish - There are oyster beds at the mouth of Dickinson Bay and throughout the area of Galveston Bay in the vicinity of Dickinson Bay. Also present in the area are blue crab (larvae and juveniles), brown shrimp, and white shrimp (spawning, larvae, and juveniles). The crab and shrimp are mostly benthic species, so it is not likely that the adults will be impacted. However the juveniles and larvae can be found in shallow waters and may be impacted the water soluble component of the oil. Birds - Black skimmers and olivaceous cormorants are nesting in the area at this time of year. Also present in the area are numerous species of waterfowl, wading birds, terns, and rails. Diving birds, such as cormorants, are usually at high risk during oil spills because they spend nearly all their time on the water surface. Wading birds, marsh birds, and some shorebirds may be directly oiled on the upper body and feathers by coming in contact with oiled vegetation or wrack. Direct oiling of birds reduces the buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by feathers, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Preening of oiled feathers may also result in ingestion of oil resulting in irritation, sickness, or death. Bird oiling, particularly of wading birds, may continue even after the floating oil slicks have been removed, depending on the extent of oiled vegetation. Oil brought back to the nests by adult birds may kill or injure eggs and young birds. Reptiles - The American alligator (nesting and hatching), Texas diamondback terrapin, and diamondback terrapin are present in the area. Oiling of these animals can result in irritation of the eyes, nose, and mouth. Heavy oiling can lead to death. Oiling of alligator eggs may result in mortality of the eggs. VI. Human-Use Resources at Risk There is a marina and boat ramp at April Fool Point, and a marina where Highway 146 crosses Dickinson Bayou. There is a water intake for Houston L&P Robinson Plant at the mouth of Salt Bayou. Dickinson Bay is also used for recreational fishing. [SEP] On Friday, 8 August 2008, USCG MSU Galveston notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a pipeline leak near Dickerson Bay in Texas. The initial report was only that sheen was observed and that a pipeline spill was reported. The USCG requested a RAR for the immediate area around the reported release. Later it was discovered that the spill was mostly contained behind the weir o a canal that prevented the bulk of the release from entering the main waterway. The pipeline was shut in. An OSRO was in route, and the spill volume was estimated at 16 bbl. No additional support was requested. [SEP] Reported location provided by USCG (image credit, google).
The NOAA SSC was notified by MSU Valdez on the morning of August 8 of the intentional grounding of the 92' F/V Northern Mariner two hours before the high tide on the previous afternoon of August 7 after striking a rock. The vessel contains 25,000 gallons of diesel in 6 wing tanks, 3 on each side of the vessel and was loaded with fish, but no release has occurred. The captain reports that damage occurred about 6 ft. from the nearest fuel tank - a one foot long hole in the forward engine room. Four persons were successfully abandoned on the evening of August 7, and MSU Valdez has requested a trajectory for a possible release. The vessel's proximity to the San Juan fish hatchery is of paramount concern to the Coast Guard. Current efforts are being focused on litering both the fuel and the fish to lighten the vessel as well as to partially deploy the pre-staged boom around the hatchery. [SEP] MER - FISHING VESSEL NORTHERN MARINER AGROUND - PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND IC: SECTOR ANCHORAGE/MSU VALDEZ MISLE: N/A WEATHER: Visibility N/A, Sea State 2 FT, Ceiling N/A, Air 55 F, Sea N/A, Wind VAR / 10 KTS SITUATION: UPDATE 111930 August 08: NORTHERN MARINER has been patched and refloated. The fish is currently being taken off the vessel. Once the stability is checked, the vessel will be lightered to remove the remaining fuel. CASE PEND [SEP] RESPONSE ACTIONS: Today, August 13, 2008, approximately 5,000 gallons of diesel fuel in the starboard side was lightered. The remaining fuel in the 5,000-gallon tank on the port side will be lightered today. The lube and hydraulic oil will also be lightered. During the vessel inspection, a crack was discovered in the engine room aft bulk head. The crack has been repaired. The F/V Northern Mariner will remain in Thumb Cove until all the fuel has been lightered and the sea conditions improve. The sea condition is expected to improve by Sunday according to the weather forecast. The F/V Northern Mariner will be towed to Seward by Tug Junior when wind and seas permit in accordance with the approved Transit Pla [SEP] Spot Forecast for F/V Northern Mariner grounding in PWS August 9, 2008 2330 ADT Sunrise/Sunset: Sunday Aug 10 Sunrise: 0457 ADT Sunset: 2111 ADT Monday Aug 11 Sunrise: 0447 ADT Sunset: 2108 ADT Winds and Sea state: Sunday: Winds from S at 5 - 10 knots, Seas 1-2 ft Sunday night: Winds from SW at 10 knots, Ses 1-2 Ft Monday: Winds from N at 10 knots, SEas 1-2 ft. Tue: NE wind 20 kt. Seas 4 FT Wed and Thur: E wind 25 kt. Seas 5 ft [SEP] On Thursday, August 21, the weather in the Gulf of Alaska was calm enough to allow towing of the F/V Northern Mariner from PWS to Seward, AK, for final repairs to the vessel. During the incident, a total of 25,000 gallons of diesel were litered, and none was released into the water. Case Closed. [SEP] MER - FISHING VESSEL NORTHERN MARINER AGROUND - PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND IC: SECTOR ANCHORAGE/MSU VALDEZ MISLE: N/A WEATHER: NSTR SITUATION: UPDATE 14AUG08: Fishing Vessel NORTHERN MARINER has been completely lightered of fuel and hydraulic oils and remains anchored in Thumb Bay awaiting a tug for transport to Seward for repairs. Total fuel and oily waste removed estimated to be 26,000 GALS. 50 gallons of lube oil remain on board in a non-integral, sealed tank. Captain of the Port (COTP) required revisions to submitted tow plan, and those revisions are on-going. Expected tow departure date is August 18 based on tug availability. Demobilized SERVS and they are removing boom from Sawmill Bay. Responsible Party (RP) pollution responders remain on scene to tender containment boom in place and finalize waste disposal. Cost document process training completed with NPFC and Sector Anchorage personnel. UC watch stood down; Incident Management section running final demob. CASE PENDS. [SEP] Photo of F/V Northern Mariner grounded [SEP] Monday morning NWS SPOT forecast for PWS, Fleming Island: PKZ125-120200- PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND 400 AM AKDT MON AUG 11 2008 .TODAY...VARIABLE WIND 10 KT. SEAS 2 FT. .TONIGHT...NE WIND 10 KT. SEAS 2 FT. .TUE...NE WIND 15 KT. SEAS 3 FT. .TUE EVENING...NE WIND 25 KT. SEAS 5 FT. .WED...NE WIND 20 KT. SEAS 4 FT. .WED EVENING . . .N WIND 25 KT. SEAS 5 FT. .THUR ... NE WIND 15 KT. SEAS 3 FT .FRI...E WIND 15 KT. SEAS 3 FT. $$ [SEP] MER - FISHING VESSEL NORTHERN MARINER AGROUND - PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND IC: SECTOR ANCHORAGE/MSU VALDEZ MISLE: N/A WEATHER: NSTR SITUATION: 121740U August 08: NORTHERN MARINER was refloated late 11AUG and has been anchored alongside the Motor Vessel ALASKAN CHALLENGER in Thumb Bay on the South side of Knight Island. There have been 295,000-lbs of fish removed from the vessel. The remaining fuel oil from the double bottom tanks is in the process of being removed. Patches are holding with minimal leakage. It is anticipate the vessel will have only residual fuels on board after Tuesday night and is awaiting tow pending weather. CASE PENDS. [SEP] FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded F/V on Flemming I., Prince William Sound, Ak. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker/Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The 92' F/V Northern Mariner on the afternoon of August 7 was intentionally grounded. The vessel contains 25,000 gallons of diesel in 6 wing tanks, 3 on each side of the vessel. No release has occurred. The captain reports that damage occurred about 6 ft. from the nearest fuel tank. The vessel's proximity to the San Juan fish hatchery is of paramount concern to the Coast Guard. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Calm winds becoming variable at less than 10 knots with seas less than 2 feet today through Sunday. Sunday night into Monday: Winds picking up to be from the north or northeast at 15 to 20 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis Summary: The most probable scenario should a spill occur is for the oil to enter Prince of Wales Passage and impact shoreline along the Passage. However if most of the 25,000 gallons of diesel were to spill on a flood tide under calm wind conditions, a sheen could move to the SE along Knight Island Passage and potentially enter Latouche Passage during an ebb tide or NE wind conditions. Under this scenario a persistent sheen could impact Sawmill Bay. Discussion: Tide currents. Knight Island Passage: Weak and variable tide currents. We expect a net current from the NW to the SE in Knight Island Passage due to runoff into Prince William Sound, this time of the year. Latouche Passage: Tide predictions indicate an average net tidal excursion of about 2 - 3 miles with the flood to the NE and the ebb to the SW. We expect a net flow to the SW. Prince of Wales Passage: Tide predictions indicate an average net tidal excursion of about 3 - 4 miles with the flood direction to the NE and the ebb direction to the SW. We expect a net flow to the SW. For oil to impact Sawmill Bay would require oil to move down Knight Island Passage on an ebb, and enter Latouche Passage. From there it would take a full ebb cycle or persistent NE winds to get to Sawmill Bay. Overall travel time of the oil from the grounded vessel would be 12 hours or more depending upon the release scenario and winds. The most likely scenario would be to have oil enter Prince of Wales Passage and impact shoreline along Prince of Wales Passage, Flemming I, and the north side of Evans Island. 3) Oil Fate estimates from ADIOS II model for a 25,000 gallon diesel spill: Under 15 knots winds a visible sheen would persist for about 15 - 20 hours Under 10 knot winds a visible sheen would persist for 20 - 24 hours Under 5 knot winds a visible sheen would persist for 36 - 48 hours [SEP] Friday, Aug. 15, morning weather forecast-PWS & Resurrection Bay, Seward PKZ121-160200- RESURRECTION BAY 400 AM AKDT FRI AUG 15 2008 .TODAY...VARIABLE WIND 10 KT. SEAS 2 FT. RAIN. .TONIGHT...VARIABLE WIND 10 KT. SEAS 2 FT. RAIN. .SAT THROUGH SUN...VARIABLE WIND 10 KT. SEAS 2 FT. .MON AND TUE...N WIND 10 KT. SEAS 2 FT. $$ PKZ125-160200- PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND 400 AM AKDT FRI AUG 15 2008 .TODAY...E WIND 20 KT DIMINISHING TO 15 KT OR LESS THIS AFTERNOON. SEAS 3 FT. RAIN SHOWERS. .TONIGHT...E WIND 15 KT OR LESS. SEAS 3 FT OR LESS. RAIN. .SAT THROUGH SUN...VARIABLE WIND 10 KT. SEAS 2 FT. .MON...NE WIND 15 KT. SEAS 3 FT. .TUE...VARIABLE WIND 10 KT. SEAS 2 FT. [SEP] NWS SPOT FORECAST FOR WED. A.M., AUGUST
An abandoned F/V with 4K gallons diesel will be salvaged tomorrow (Saturday).CG is asking for a worse case scenario trajectory [SEP] Note the F/V is ground on a shoal offshore. [SEP] Date: July 25, 2008 To: USCG Seiger / NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential spill from grounded F/V FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: An abandoned F/V with about 4,000 gallons of diesel fuel will be salvaged tomorrow (Saturday). It is about 13 nm SE of Tigre Pt and 15 nm SWof Marsh Island, La. The coordinates are 29?? 20'N by 92?? 10' W. See attached map. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Saturday: Winds from the W at 5 - 10 knots with 2 foot seas. Saturday night: Winds from the SW at 5- 10 knots with 2 foot seas. Sunday: Winds from the SW at 5 - 10 knots with 2 - 3 foot seas. 2) Trajectory Analysis for a 4,000 gallon diesel spill We do not expect any potential diesel spill to persist long enough to impact land. Under the calm conditions we would expect a visible sheen from a 4000 gallon diesel spill to persist for about 12 - 15 hours. With the moderate W and SW winds and the source being 13 - 15 nm from the closest shoreline, the oil will not persist long enough to impact land. We would expect a visible sheen extending 2 - 3 miles to the E to NE from the source. 3) Oil Fate Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL Wind Speed = constant at 7 knots Wave Height = 2 ft Total Amount of Oil Released = 4,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 4,000 - 7 - 1 - 92 2 4,000 14 4 82 4 4,000 - 27 - 14 - 58 6 4,000 35 27 39 8 4,000 - 37 - 36 - 26 10 4,000 39 43 18 12 4,000 - 40 - 47 - 13 [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] ADIOS table
The Crowley Barge 180-1 is grounded on a beach near the Togiak Fisheries Inc. Cannery in Togiak, Alaska.  According to loading reports the barge has approximately 175,000 gallons of diesel, 24,000 gallons of gasoline, and 23,000 gallons of jet A fuel onboard.  The double-hulled barge was intentionally grounded (on a soft, sandy bottom) for the delivery of the fuel; however, it grounded too high on the beach to re-float.  There has been no spillage of any product and the likelihood of a release is considered small, but a hotline has been opened as a precaution. The owner is preparing a "salvage" plan, which will likely include off-loading a portion of the fuel onto another barge on Saturday.  The USCG has requested information on potential resources at risk in the event that there is spillage of all or part of the fuel.  The incident location is 59 degrees, 3 minutes north latitude and 160 degrees 20 minutes west longitude. [SEP] As compiled by the Regional Environmental Officer - Alaska U.S. Department of the Interior As requested, here is preliminary information regarding potential resources at risk for the grounding of Barge 180-1 near the Village of Togiak based on contacts made with representatives of the following State and Federal natural resource trustee agencies: DOI-Fish and Wildlife Service: The Togiak National Wildlife Refuge Manager has been notified. Based on the location information provided to date, the incident is outside of the Togiak NWR boundaries; however, a significant release could affect refuge lands. Primary concern: Red Salmon fishery which is winding down and the Coho fishery that will be gearing up soon. Until you get out towards the cape there are only a few seabird colonies: Glaucous winged gulls, cormorants and pigeon guillemots. There is low potential for sea otters in the area. U.S. Department of the Interior - Bureau of Indian Affairs: There is one Native allotment located approximately 4 kilometers southwest of the Village of Togiak on the coast and a second Native allotment located approximately 3.5 kilometers southeast of the Village of Togiak on the coast. National Marine Fisheries Service: There are likely to be seals in the area and sea lions offshore and associated with salmon stream mouths. Next to the cannery there would be less concern. Alaska Department of Fish and Game: There are 4 anadromous fish streams near Togiak that support a variety of salmonid species: Kurtluk River (chum), an unnamed stream right near Togiak (king, sockeye), Togiak River (chum, coho, king, pink, sockeye, dolly varden and whitefish) and another unnamed stream across the bay from Togiak (chum, coho, king, pink, sockeye and arctic char). The Togiak River is currently open for commercial fishing, and will be closing on July 25. ESI maps indicate potential presence of harlequin ducks, black scoter, common eider, long-tailed duck, scaup and Steller???€?s eider. Bald eagle may also be present. The Togiak salmon fishery is at its peak this week with lots of effort and escapement. Subsistence fishing for salmon is likely to be occurring in the Togiak River with some effort on Togiak Bay area beaches especially near the communities of Togiak and Twin Hills at this time. There are significant sport fisheries occurring in the Togiak River (all the way down to it's outlet into Togiak Bay) for 5 species of Pacific salmon, Dolly Varden, rainbow trout, Arctic grayling, and other resident species from June through September. Alaska Office of History and Archaeology: There are a number of known village sites in the vicinity of Togiak and up the Togiak River. A significant release into the bay or river could potentially affect cultural sites. [SEP] Briefing to CG Sector Anchorage and to Crowley, July 25, 2008 [SEP] MSDS for diesel and Jet A [SEP] CROWLEY BARGE 180-1, TOGIAK, AK Thursday 1030 ADT, July 24, 2008 Sunset (7/24): 2305 Sunrise (7/25): 0603 Sunset (7/25): 2303 Hour Forecast Winds: Thursday afternoon: winds from the NW at 20 knots with gust to 30 knots. Thursday night: winds from the NW at 25 knots with gust to 35 knots. Friday: winds from the NW at 15 knots with gust to 25 knots. Saturday: winds from the NW at 15 knots with gust to 25 knots. Sunday: winds from the NW at 15 knots with gust to 25 knots. Precipitation: Thursday: no precipitation is forecast in the region. Friday: no precipitation is expected in the region. Saturday: chance of showers in the region. Sunday: : no precipitation is predicted in the region. Seas: Thursday: seas are expected to be 3-4 feet. Friday: seas are forecast to be 3-4 feet. Saturday: seas are expected to be 3-4 feet. Sunday: seas are predicted to be 3-4 feet. [SEP] MER - TB 180-1 AGROUND, TOGIAK - TOGIAK, AK IC: USCG, ADEC MISLE: 3277128 WEATHER: NSTR SITUATION: 271507U - Marine Chemist arrived in Dillingham this evening with the Crowley Engineer, and will conduct tests tomorrow on barge 180-1. Barges are safely moored in Dillingham. CASE PENDS. SUBJ: POLREP THREE AND FINAL, CROWLEY BARGE 180-1, ON 1155831, MAJOR POTENTIAL DISCHARGE, 175,649 GAL DIESEL, 23,064 GAL JET FUEL, 23,639 GAL GASOLINE, TOGIAK HARBOR, TOGIAK BAY, TOGIAK, AK, M.C. 415831, I.M.A.3277128 1. SITUATION: (ALL TIMES LOCAL) A. 281300JUL08: ON 26JUL2008 APPROX. 120,000 GAL OF DIESEL WAS SUCCESSFULLY LIGHTERED TO THE BARGE RAY'SONS WITHOUT A POLLUTION INCIDENT AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH A CG REVIEWED LIGHTERING PLAN. BARGE 180-1 REFLOATED ON THE 26JUL HIGH TIDE AND SAFELY TRANSITTED TO DILLINGHAM. BARGE MOORED ON 28JUL2008. B. WX: TODAY: NW WIND 15KTS. SEAS 5FT. AREAS OF FOG. 2. ACTION: (ALL TIMES LOCAL) A. 252000JUL08: SECTOR PERSONNEL ARRIVE IN TOGIAK. B. 260847JUL08: BARGE RAY'SONS ARRIVES IN TOGIAK BAY C. 261254JUL08: TRANSFER BEGINS D. 261938JUL08: TRANSFER CONCLUDED E. 262236JUL08: BARGE 180-1 OFF OF BEACH WITHOUT INCIDENT, ALL VOIDS SOUNDED NO WATER PRESENT. F. 271507JUL08: CROWLEY ENGINEER AND MARINE CHEMIST ARRIVE IN DILLINGHAM. G. 272035JUL08: BARGE SAFELY MOORED IN DILLINGHAM. 3. FUTURE PLANS AND RECOMMENDATIONS: A. COAST GUARD INSPECTOR EN ROUTE FOR DAMAGE SURVEY. [SEP] MSDS for gasoline
USCG Sector Guam contacted the NOAA SSC the night of July 20 to request support for release of 19,000 gallons of JP-8 fuel 20 nautical miles northwest of Guam due to the collision of two military jets on July 21 at 1000. Information was requested on jet fuel persistence and likelihood of shoreline impact. [SEP] The point here is that the obs from the airport at Guam show that the winds have had an Easterly component of been calm. This would not result in any oil sheen to the NW of Guam coming ashore. [SEP] Note Oceanic currents off Guam from from East to West. This analysis is from : http://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/ [SEP] Example ADIOS run using similar fuel indicated fuel will dissipate within approximately 6 hours or less, due primarily to evaporation. Fuel is not expected to impact shoreline. [SEP] USCG Sector Guam contacted the NOAA SSC the night of July 20 to request support for release of 19,000 gallons of JP-8 fuel 20 nautical miles northwest of Guam due to the collision of two military jets on July 21 at 1000 (Guam time). Information was requested on jet fuel persistence and likelihood of shoreline impact.
USCG Sector Portland contacted the NOAA SSC for a trajectory forecast in the event of worst-case release during upcoming removal actions on the LST 1166, a 400 foot landing ship tank moored IVO 'Lord Island' on the Columbia River. The removal actions will consist of the abatement of the onboard asbestos and the removal of unknown quantities of oil and hazmat. For the trajectory assessment, it is assumed that about 10,000 gallons of diesel and about 1,000 gallons of lube oil/bilge slops could be released. [SEP] https://www.piersystem.com/go/page/21/25196/ [SEP] V/r Stephanie LT Shaun Edwards email address: Shaun.L.Edwards@uscg.mil -----Original Message----- From: Chris.Barker@noaa.gov [mailto:Chris.Barker@noaa.gov] Sent: Wednesday, October 29, 2008 2:50 PM To: Sulser, Stephanie LTJG Cc: Ruth Yender; Glen Watabayashi Subject: LST-1166 LTJG Sulser, I've left you a voice mail, but I though I'd follow up with a email. I understand from Ruth that you are looking for potential Ocean dumping sites for the LST-1166. I'm not sure what your specific questions are, but here are few thoughts, some of which may be obvious: We assume that the vessel is pretty clean of oils, etc, though there may still be a few dribbles. It should be away from the shipping lanes. It should be outside the Columbia River Bar. It should be in deep enough water that it isn't a navigation hazard and won't be moved about too much by waves and currents: We think greater than 30 fathoms would be OK. It should be far enough from shore that small dribbles of oil won't make significant impact on shore -- greater than about 5 miles. This does depend on the type and quantity of oils that may be released. If you really want it "gone", deep in the Astoria Canyon would be a good bet, if that's not too far. I'm not sure what fishing activities, such as trawling, occur in that region -- this could influence where a good spot would be. We can research that further if you need us to. Is there any idea that it could become useful as an artificial reef? If so, then more research would have to be done about what would be an appropriate depth for that. Please feel free to call/email us with further questions. -Chris [SEP] TIME: 1700 PDT Thursday, July 17, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Ruth Yender FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Trajectory for LST-1166 Salvage For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a possible release during Salvage operations of the LST-1166. The scenario is a worst case discharge during removal actions on the LST 1166, a 400 foot landing ship tank moored IVO 'lord island' on the Columbia River. These removal actions will consist of the abatement of the onboard asbestos and the removal of unknown quantities of oil and hazmat. For this assessment, it is assumed that about 10,000 gallons of Diesel and about 1,000 gallons of lube oil/bilge slops could be released. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ The USCG MST2 Wayne Lau did a preliminary analysis. The following are some additional comments about the situation. WIND EFFECTS: ------------------------------- The winds at the time of a release would have two different effects in the oil. The winds will tend to move the oil, determining what shorelines are impacted. In addition, winds will greatly effect the evaporation of the an released oil. A low winds speed is indeed likely to be the worst case, as it will allow the oil to persist longer, as well as pushing the oil toward shore slowly, allowing it to move farther downstream with the currents. Based in historical data, we expect the winds to be greater than 10 knots about 10% of the time, and greater than 5 knots about 40% of the time. OIL FATE: ------------------------------- Diesel fuel tends to evaporate and disperse fairly quickly. moderate winds would length the persistence of a spill. NOAA's Adios model, run with the heaviest Diesel Fuel in its library, and using a wind speed of 5 knots, and a water temperature of 68F (the current temp at the Longview Weather Observation Station), indicates that a significant sheen could last for over 5 days. However, it is unlikely that the winds would remain that low for that long. With a 10 knot wind, it would persist for less that 3 days, and with a 15 knot wind, about a day. In addition, the sheen would likely be pushed ashore by the wind, so as not to travel more than a few miles downstream, depending on the direction and velocity of the wind. Lube oils will not evaporate, but they will disperse into the water column in high energy environment, and the quantities are likely to be much smaller. We don't expect them to be a long term or long range issue in this case. TRAJECTORY: ------------------------------- While the river is influenced by tides in the region, and will move faster and slower with the tides, the flow is continuously downstream. The estimate of about a knot average flow in the main channel is reasonable. The vessel is located in a slough off the main channel south of Lord Island. The flow in the slough will be substantially slower than the main channel, but will still be downstream. Any sheen that is moved down the slough will enter the main channel approximately four miles downstream. Depending on the wind speed and direction, much of the released oil is likely to have beached in the slough before entering the main channel, so the most likely effected area would be the slough southwest of Lord and Walker islands. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS: ------------------------------- BEHAVIOR OF SPILLED DIESEL FUEL: Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. These oils do not generally present an involved cleanup problem. However, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and can persist as a biological threat in low energy marine environments. BEHAVIOR OF LUBE OILS: Lubricating oils are ubiquitous. They are used in all types of engines operating on land, at sea, or in the air. All lubricating oils are composed mainly of high-boiling point (>400 ??C) hydrocarbons containing 25 to 40 carbon atoms per molecule. Compound classes that impart undesirable qualities to a lubricant (waxes, polar compounds, and others) are removed in the refining processes. To meet the requirements of many different engine types and operating conditions, a multitude of oil products have been developed. These can be divided into two groups: 1) oils used in continuous service, such as turbine oils and 2) oils used in intermittent service, such as motor oils. Oils used in continuous service operate at a fairly constant temperature for prolonged periods without frequent shutdown or renewal. Stability is of prime importance. Oils used in intermittent service must show little viscosity change with temperature (high viscosity indices). These oils must also be changed at frequent intervals to remove particulates collected during service. Stability of these oils is, therefore, a secondary consideration. Additives: Additives are used to improve or impart various properties to the highly refined lubricating base oil. Automotive engine oils can contain a wide variety of additives including metallic detergents or ashless dispersants for controlling deposits, oxidation inhibitors, corrosion inhibitors, anti-wear additives, low temperature flow improvers, viscosity and friction modifiers. Railway locomotive diesel engine oils and marine diesel engine oils typically contain ashless dispersants and metallic detergents. Zinc-free detergents and silver lubricity agents are used where silver bearings are present. Environmental Behavior: Lubricating oils, for all their differences in formulation, have many similarities. When spilled into a lake, river, or ocean they will spread rapidly to a thin slick. They will not evaporate, and they will disperse fairly readily in high energy conditions without the addition of chemical dispersants. In general, lubricating oils are of low to moderate aquatic toxicity. While the base oils used in the production of lubricating oils are generally of extremely low
USCG Sector Honolulu contacted the NOAA SSC to request a hindcast trajectory analysis for a sheen reported and observed approximately 55 nautical miles northwest of Oahu, Hawaii to determine if the release could have come from vessels in the vicinity participating in a major Naval exercise. [SEP] Based on the observed winds from Lihue Airport and the weekly averaged currents from Sea Surface Height analysis, we would expect an oil spill in the reported area would have moved 15 - 20 nm to the SW over 24 hours. Winds were trades(NE) but less than 10 knots on Tuesday and into Wednesday morning and picked up to 10 - 15 knots on Wednesday afternoon, so it would not be surprising that a slick from a release Tuesday afternoon or evening could have persisted into Wednesday afternoon. With the winds and sea state increasing today to 7 - 9 feet, we would not expect a slick to persist through today. Considering the increased trade winds last night and today from the NE to ENE direction, we would not expect a slick that persisted to impact Kauai. However, if more than just a sheen is observed, please let us know because winds will have a more easterly component this afternoon. (In such a case, Niihau, to the east, might be at some risk). [SEP] USCG Sector Honolulu contacted the NOAA SSC to request a hindcast trajectory analysis for a sheen reported and observed approximately 55 nautical miles northwest of Oahu to determine whether the release could have come from vessels in the vicinity participating in a major Navy exercise. On or about 1500 on July 15, 2008, USCG Sector Honolulu received a report from USNS Guadalupe of an oil sheen with the dimensions of 1 mile long and one-half mile wide observed at 1400 approximately 55 nautical miles northwest of Oahu (that did not come from their vessel). USCG helo aerial observation confirmed an unrecoverable sheen observed at the reported location in a track heading 060 true dissipating and heading out to sea. Naval vessels were observed in the area conducting maneuvers and approaches in the area to a Fleet Replenishment Oiler. A second helo overflight on July 16 could not relocate the sheen.
Early during the morning of July 7 the 207' cruise ship Spirit of Glacier Bay grounded on a soft, silty mud bottom at the northern end of Tarr Inlet with 3000 to 4000 gallons of #2 diesel during a falling tide.   No discharge was reported when Sector Juneau was notified at 0744 on July 7.   NOAA is currently providing tides and weather information to the Coast Guard along with a preliminary written trajectory.   The vessel refloated on the afternoon rising tide.  No compromise occurred to the hull or fuel tanks, although there was some minor internal structural damage.  The vessel will be headed to dry dock for a complete examination and repair, as needed. [SEP] At 1620 on Monday, July 7, the Spirit of Glacier Bay was refloated on a rising tide. The engines started in fine condition, and a preliminary examination of the haul indicated no breaches that might result in fuel leakage. Divers on-scene were unable to fully exam the hull due to the turbidity of the water. The CG allowed the vessel to proceed slowly to Bartlett Cove where a more complete survey will occur. [SEP] SPIRIT OF GLACIER BAY, GLACIER BAY, AK 1000 ADT, Monday July 07, 2008 Sunset (7/07): 2201 Sunrise (7/08): 0407 Sunset (7/08): 2200 Forecast Winds: Today: winds will be from the N at 5-10 knots shifting this late afternoon to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds from the SE at 10-15 knots. Tuesday: winds from the SE at 10-15 knots with gust to 20 knots. Wednesday: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 15-20 knots. Precipitation: Today: rain likely in the afternoon. Tonight: rain likely in the area. Tuesday: rain likely in the area Wednesday: chance of rain is forecast in the area. Thursday: isolated showers and thunderstorms in the area. Seas: Today: seas 1-2 feet. Tonight: seas 1-2 feet. Tuesday: seas 1-2 feet. Wednesday: seas 1-2 feet. Thursday: seas 1-2 feet. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the upper 50???€?s to lows in the upper 40???€?s. [SEP] Map of grounding in Glacier Bay with another photo [SEP] SAR - MOTOR VESSEL SPIRIT OF GLACIER BAY - GLACIER BAY IC: SECTOR JUNEAU MISLE: 412586 WEATHER: NSTR SITUATION: 101706U: The SPIRIT OF GLACIER BAY left Auke Bay for Ketchikan, initially transiting in accordance with its Coast Guard and State approved transit plan, on a one hour communications schedule. At approximately 1706U the vessel reported taking on water at a rate of 10-15 gallons per minute from a location 15FT starboard of the centerline on frame 46. The vessel was directed, by Sector Juneau, to the nearest port of Wrangell, where the vessel was moored and containment boom was deployed around the vessel until an underwater dive survey can be conducted and temporary repairs made. Wrangell SAR coordinated with the local harbormaster to provide additional pumps and boom for the vessel. A Coast Guard marine inspector and a commercial diver will attend the vessel on the morning of the 11th. Permanent repairs are scheduled to be made in Ketchikan on 17 July. CASE PENDS. [SEP] TIME: 1000 ADT Monday, July 7, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Tidal Currents near the Spirit of Glacier Bay For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ There are no tidal current stations near the ship's location. However, analysis of the tidal currents at Beardslee Island indicate that the currents in Glacier Bay are in sync with the tidal heights. Thus, we expect that there will be slack water in Tarr Inlet near the times of the high and low tides, and max flood between the low and high, and max ebb between the high and low. Tidal current velocities will be fairly low near the head of the inlet, increasing toward the mouth of the inlet, up to a max of perhaps about a 1/4 to 1/2 knot near Russell Island. Approximate Tidal Current Timing: From Mon Jul 07, 2008 to Wed Jul 09, 2008 (3 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Date Time Description ------------------------------------------------------- 05:00 Min Before Ebb 07/07/2008 08:20 Max Ebb Mon 11:40 Min Before Flood 14:50 Max Flood 18:00 Min Before Ebb 21:00 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 00:00 Min Before Flood 07/08/2008 03:00 Max Flood Tue 06:00 Min Before Ebb 09:10 Max Ebb 12:20 Min Before Flood 15:30 Max Flood 18:40 Min Before Ebb 21:50 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 01:00 Min Before Flood 07/09/2008 03:55 Max Flood Wed 06:50 Min Before Ebb 09:55 Max Ebb 13:00 Min Before Flood 16:10 Max Flood 19:25 Min Before Ebb [SEP] ADIOS [SEP] From USCG [SEP] Tide Heights [SEP] from USCG [SEP] SAR - AGROUND - MOTOR VESSEL SPIRIT OF GLACIER BAY - GLACIER BAY IC: SECTOR JUNEAU MISLE: 412586 WEATHER: NSTR SITUATION: 070755U July: Sector Juneau Command Center received a call from the Motor Vessel SPIRIT OF GLACIER BAY reporting that they had run aground in the North West corner of Glacier Bay on a Glacial sandbar with 49 persons on board. A Critical Incident Communication was initiated. Sector Juneau requested two Air Station Sitka aircraft from District Seventeen, directed the launch of the Coast Guard Cutter LIBERTY, a Station Juneau 47FT Motor Lifeboat and 25FT Response Boat (RB-S), and transported two marine inspectors by float plane to assess the situation. There were no reported injuries, hull damage, or pollution. The Motor Vessel FAIRWEATHER EXPRESS II responded from Bartlett Cove but was unable to facilitate a passenger transfer due to the grounded vessels location. Marine inspectors noted port side minor insets as well as buckling plates and bent frames. At 1614U, the Motor Vessel SPIRIT OF GLACIER BAY re-floated with the incoming tide and after conducting satisfactory steering and propulsion tests with the Motor Life Boat (MLB) attached by bowline all passengers and non-essential crew were transferred to the Motor Vessel FAIRWEATHER EXPRESS II. In all, 40 personnel were transported with 14 personnel remaining on board for transit to Bartlett Cove (9 crewmembers, three commercial divers, and two Sector Juneau personnel). At 1930U, the Motor Vessel FAIRWEATHER EXPRESS II moored safely and offloaded all passengers as Coast Guard Cutter LIBERTY escorted the Motor Vessel SPIRIT OF GLACIER BAY to Bartlett Cove. On eight July the vessel will undergo a rigorous hull assessment prior to departing Bartlett Cove for dry dock. The Tug ARDIE is enroute to escort the vessel to dry dock with an estimated time of arrival around 080700U. [SEP] from USCG
On the evening of 2 July 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA HAZMAT Duty Officer of a grounded inbound tanker at the entrance to Galveston Bay, TX.  The reported position is 29° 21.37’ N Lat. 094° 46.66’ W Long.  This position places the vessel just south of the Port Bolivar Ferry Landing.  The T/V FAIRCHEM FILLY is carrying 43,000 gallons of Intermediate Fuel Oil (IFO).  No pollution is reported at present.  The USCG has requested a trajectory analysis. [SEP] The tanker was refloated shortly after 6:00 AM this morning, 3 July 2008. No reports of pollution or damage. The NOAA SSC did make a follow call to NOAA???€?s OCS Coordinator for Texas since there had been a series of groundings in this area over the few weeks. He stated that he would follow up with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to see if they know of anything. This entry serves as the final report. [SEP] On the evening of 2 July 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA HAZMAT Duty Officer of a grounded inbound tanker at the entrance to Galveston Bay, TX. The reported position is 29?? 21.37???€? N Lat. 094?? 46.66???€? W Long. This position places the vessel just south of the Port Bolivar Ferry Landing. The M/V FAIRCHEM FILLY is carrying 43,000 gallons of Intermediate Fuel Oil (IFO). No pollution is reported at present. The USCG has requested a trajectory analysis. The NOAA Home Team was contacted and are currently developing a trajectory analysis. [SEP] (source, NOAA SHIO) [SEP] It would seem that the predicted tides are very close to the actual. Note that the times on this plot are GMT -- which is 5 hours ahead of Central Dayight time. [SEP] (source, NOAA SHIO) [SEP] A trajectory and RAR assessment was provided to the USCG. The Coast Guard reported that two barges are standing by the vessel. It is hoped that the vessel floats free on the morning high tide. NOAA will stand by to provide any additional support requested. [SEP] The M/V FAIRCHEM FILLY is a Chemical Tanker operated by Fairfield Chemical Carriers. The vessel is 138 m long, 24 m wide, and has a reported draft of 5.8 m. [SEP] Image with reported location plotted (image credit, google). [SEP] A stock photograph of the M/V FAIRCHEM FILLY (photo credit, Frans Sanderse). This photograph is NOT of the vessel aground in Galveston.
On the afternoon of 30 June 2008, the USCG notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a reported sheen off Cameron Parish, LA.  The report stated that there was gas bubbling to the surface and a 1.5 mile sheen.  In the area was buoy marking a pipeline.  The USCG has request a trajectory. [SEP] On the afternoon of 30 June 2008, the USCG notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of a reported sheen off Cameron Parish, LA. The report stated that there was gas bubbling to the surface and a 1.5 mile sheen. In the area was buoy marking a pipeline. The USCG has request a trajectory. The USCG has request an overfight to investigate and are in the process of identifying the pipeline owner. No additional information is available at present. The NOAA HAZMAT Home Team is developing a trajectory analysis. [SEP] The attached series of photographs were taken on 30 June 2008 of the pipeline discharge. The USCG observer reported that the pipeline was clearly bubbling on the water surface with sheen originating from the same spot. The sheen made an arc shape to the west then east. Sheen then dissipated almost immediately and no recoverable product was identified. Amount estimated by the observers to be less than 5 gallons on-water. [SEP] The attached series of photographs were taken on 30 June 2008 of the pipeline discharge. The USCG observer reported that the pipeline was clearly bubbling on the water surface with sheen originating from the same spot. The sheen made an arc shape to the west then east. Sheen then dissipated almost immediately and no recoverable product was identified. Amount estimated by the observers to be less than 5 gallons on-water. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] The attached series of photographs were taken on 30 June 2008 of the pipeline discharge. The USCG observer reported that the pipeline was clearly bubbling on the water surface with sheen originating from the same spot. The sheen made an arc shape to the west then east. Sheen then dissipated almost immediately and no recoverable product was identified. Amount estimated by the observers to be less than 5 gallons on-water. [SEP] TIME: 1600 CDT Monday, June 30, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Sheen at West Cameron Block 20 For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a sheen in West Cameron Block 20. A sheen was reported at about 1430 today, about 1.46 nautical miles long, that "smelled like gasoline". Its location was reported as 29??42.17'N--093??36.826'W. That location is about 3 miles offshore, about 10 miles east of Sabine Pass. This is in the vicinity of a known leak in a natural gas pipeline, and may be related--perhaps a light condensate from that release. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today: winds from the NE at 5-10 knots becoming light and variable after midnight. Tuesday morning : winds will be light and variable. Tuesday night: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Wednesday: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: In that region, the movement of the oil will be dominated by the wind, with some slight influence by a coastal current, which is expected to be small. The northeast winds today will tend to move the oil away from shore perhaps another mile or so. Little movement is expected tomorrow, then the southeast and south winds predicted for Tuesday night through Thursday could move the sheen toward shore, perhaps resulting in whatever small scattered sheens remain impacting the beach in the region about 5 to 10 miles east of Sabine pass by Wednesday night. 3) OIL FATE: A sheen that is reported to "smell like gasoline" is likely to be light and evaporate or disperse quickly. We don't know what the product is, and the light winds in the next couple days could allow the sheen to persist a bit longer than usual, but we don't expect there will be much noticeable effect by the time any remaining sheen reaches the beach. [SEP] The RP has been identified as Stone Energy Corporation. Stone Energy reported a discharge of 2 Gallons, actually 1.89 gallons (NRC Rep 875860). Product is condensate from a Natural Gas pipeline. Stone Energy is in the process of staging to repair of the pipeline. The USCG reports that they to have three vessels on-scene (jack up, dive boat and crew boat). All three should currently be on-scene. The plan is to locate the discharge source (pipeline failure) and assess with divers. The divers will attempt to secure the source by installing a clamp. A pollution dome and containment boom will also be deployed to mitigate discharged product. The initial response was based on NRC Report 875774, a vessel operator reported bubbling in the water and a oil slick. The pipeline is reported to be a 16" Natural Gas pipeline going from WC45A to Stone Energy's Johnson Bayou facility. It is 41,379 feet long with a liquid capacity of 9045 bbls. The pipeline is shut in, but pressure is continuing to bleed off (as of yesterday afternoon). The company will have a helicopter making overflights of the area intermittently throughout the operation. No additional support has been request by the USCG. [SEP] MYSTERY SPILL, SHIP SHOAL AREA, LA 1300 CDT, Monday June 30, 2008 Sunset (6/30): 2009 Sunrise (7/01): 0608 Sunset (7/01): 2009 Forecast Winds: Today: winds from the NW at 5-10 knots becoming SW at 5-10 knots late in the afternoon. Tonight: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots coming NW at 5-10 knots after midnight. Tuesday morning : winds from the N at 5-10 knots. Tuesday night: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Wednesday: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Thursday: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots coming S at 10-15 knots late in the afternoon. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms in the area Tonight: isolated showers and thunderstorms in the area. Tuesday: isolated showers and thunderstorms in the area. Wednesday: isolated showers and thunderstorms in the area. Thursday: isolated showers and thunderstorms in the area Seas: Today: seas 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Tonight: seas 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Tuesday: seas 1-2 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Wednesday: seas 1-2 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Thursday: seas 1-2 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters increasing to 2-3 late in the day. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the mid to upper 80's to lows in the upper 70???€?s. [SEP] Ploted position of reported slick at approximately 1430 hrs on 30 June 2008 (image credit, google).
On the morning of 28 June 2008, USCG MSU Galveston notified the HAZMAT Duty Officer of a grounded barge near the entrance to Galveston Bay TX. The Tug Marlin was pushing the oceangoing Barge GULFSTREAM and ran aground at 0230 hrs local time in vicinity of Bolivar Anchorage near Galveston TX. The barge was loaded with 63,100 BBL of No.6 Fuel Oil. There has been no reported leak at this time. The USCG requested a trajectory forecast. The HAZMAT Duty Officer contact the regional NOAA SSC and initiated the support requested. [SEP] The attached map shows the reported position of the Barge GULFSTREAM on 28 June 2008 (image credit, google). [SEP] Location with respect to Western Gulf of Mexico (image credit, google). [SEP] Resources at Risk Assessment The following represents an initial assessment of resources at risk for a potential release of Fuel Oil #6 in the Bolivar Roads area of Galveston Texas from the Barge GULFSTREAM. This area has a high concentration of natural resources that would be threaten by an oil spill including several species that are protected as federal and state threaten/endangered species. The east end of Galveston Island (the Big Reef Area), Bolivar Flats Shorebird Sanctuary, and Pelican Island are just examples of highly sensitive areas with a high density of birds at risk from a fuel oil spill. Please review the following information and contact the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator if you have any questions. Emergency cellular contact number: (206) 849-9928. Note, this assessment was prepared during the emergency response and is intended only for response planning. It may be incomplete given the short time frame available for preparation, but it does provide adequate information for response planning. The report contains essentially the same information as that provided during the Barge Energy grounding in May 2008. Should there be an actual release, please contact the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator immediately to refine the analysis based on actual spill information. Resources at Risk Assessment for Barge GULFSTREAM Grounding I. Spill Source Information The Barge reported aground at approximately 29?? 20.81N / 094?? 46.01W in the Bolivar Anchorage in Galveston, Texas. The estimated cargo onboard was reported as 63,100 bbls. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report includes the lower Houston Ship Channel and the west end of Bolivar Peninsula, Pelican Island, and eastern Galveston Island. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations, and was prepared to provide an initial assessment of immediate Resources at Risk from a potential spill. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material Heavy fuel oils have a relatively low water solubility and are highly persistant. Exposure to skin, mucous membranes, lungs, or the gastrointestinal tract may lead to toxic effects for birds, reptiles and marine mammals. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The following provides an assessment of shoreline types that may be impact from a fuel oil release: Bolivar Peninsula. Western tip of the Bolivar Peninsula shorelines are composed of coarse-grained sand beaches, fine-grained sand beaches, exposed man-mad structures, exposed riprap, and salt and brackish marshes. Shorelines along the northern and southern shores of the Bolivar Peninsula are primarily fine-grained sand beaches with portions of salt/brackish marshes. Bolivar Flats Shorebird Sanctuary is located just east of the ferry terminal and is a very special place with a high density of birds. Texas City Dike. The North and South Jetties and the Texas City Dike are composed of exposed riprap structures. Pelican Island. Northeastern Pelican Island is composed primarily of coarse-grained sand beaches. Southeastern Pelican Island is composed of coarse-grained and fine-grained sand beaches with some exposed riprap, exposed solid structures, and sheltered, solid man-made structures. The western shoreline of Pelican Island and the small spoil/marsh island to the west is primarily salt/brackish marsh and scarps/steep slopes in clay with some fine-grained sand beach. Galveston. The shoreline along Galveston Channel is primarily exposed, solid man-made structures with some exposed riprap and sheltered, solid, man-made structures. The Lagoon is a salt and brackish marsh. The shoreline adjacent to Bolivar Roads and the Gulf of Mexico on Galveston Island are primarily fine-grained sand beach. V. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened/Endangered Birds/Reptiles in Immediate Threat Area: Birds. Reddish egret (state threatened) may be present at the western edge of Bolivar Peninsula. Brown pelican (federally endangered) and white-faced ibis (state threatened) may also be present. Piping plover (state/federally threatened) may be present, but most would have migrated by this time of year to northern breeding areas. The peregrine falcon (federally endangered) should have also migrated from these region as well as the long-billed curlew (state species of special concern) and the Common loon (state species of special concern). Critical Habitat. Designated Critical Habitat for wintering piping plover occurs near Big Reef (Galveston Island) and Bolivar Flats (these areas are protected as habitat even without the species being present). Reptiles. Loggerhead (state endangered/federally threatened) and Kemp???€?s ridley (state/federally endangered) sea turtles may be present in low concentrations in Gulf waters. Other Biological Resources Present in Immediate Threat Area: Birds. Bird species potentially present on Bolivar Flats may include a high concentrations of shorebirds, wading birds, gulls, terns, diving birds (such as cormorant, American white pelican, black skimmer. Marsh birds (such as the clapper rail) would also be present. Birds present in Gulf waters include gulls, terns, and magnificent frigatebird. Fish and Invertebrates. Fish and invertebrates potentially present in the immediate shallow waters of Galveston Bay include: southern flounder, pinfish, striped mullet, red drum, bay anchovy, seatrout, Atlantic croaker (very high concentrations), crevalle jack, sand and seatrout, shrimp (white shrimp spawning), blue crab, and oysters. Other species present in the Gulf include gafftopsail catfish, pompano, sharks, menhaden, gray snapper, hardhead catfish, croaker, red drum, mullet, Spanish mackerel, southern kingfish, blue crab, brown shrimp, and white shrimp. Essential Fish Habitat . This area would be considered EFH for many marine/estuarine resources including brown shrimp, white shrimp, red drum, lane snapper, Spanish mackerel, cobia, dolphin, and bluefish. Reptiles. Diamondback terrapin may be present in Hanna Reef area and along western Bolivar Peninsula/Horseshoe Lake. Marine Mammals. Bottlenose dolphin may be present in Bay and Gulf waters. Marine mammals receive special protection under the Marine Mammal Protection Act. VI. Other Resources at Risk Human-Use Resources. Beach access points, boat ramps, heliports, and marinas are numerous in the area. Commercial ship traffic moves through Houston Ship Channel. [SEP] (see attached map) [SEP] NOAA Weather Forecast BARGE GROUNDING, BOLIVAR ANCHORAGE , TX 1100 CDT, Thursday June 26, 2008 Sunset (6/28): 2023 Sunrise (6/29): 0623 Sunset (6/29): 2023 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Sunday : winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Sunday night: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Monday: winds from the NW at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: chance of showers and thunderstorms in the afternoon. Tonight: chance showers and thunderstorms in the area late. Sunday: chance showers and thunderstorms in the area early in the day Changing to showers. Monday: chance showers and thunderstorms in the area. Seas: Today: seas 3-5 feet, with bay waters slightly choppy. Tonight: seas 3-4 feet bay waters becoming smooth. Sunday: seas 2-4 feet bay waters smooth. Monday: seas 2-3 feet bay waters smooth. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs to be near 90 and lows in the upper 70???€?s. [SEP] Tug Marlin and Barge GULFSTREAM on 28 June 2008 (provided by USCG). [SEP] (see attachment) [SEP] (see attachment) [SEP] On Sunday, 29 June 2008, the USCG that the barge had been lightered and refloated. No pollution was observed. [SEP] NOAA Trajectory Analysis and Predicted Oil Fate TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry TIME: Saturday, June 28, 2008 0800 CDT FROM: NOAA/ERD SUBJECT: Barge GULFSTREAM FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. ________________________________________________________________ The reported scenario: Tug Marlin pushing oceangoing Barge GULFSTREAM (loaded with 63,100 BBL of No.6 oil) ran aground at 0230 in vicinity of Bolivar Anchorage, Galveston Channel Entrance, 29??? 20.81'N, 094??? 46.01'W. There has been no reported leak at this time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as itwould affect any trajectory implications. ________________________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast: Today: winds are from the S at 10-15 knots. Sunday : winds are predicted to be from the S at 5-10 knots. Monday: winds are forecasted as NW at 5-10 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis: The Barge location is near the primary channel at Bolivar Roads. The tidal currents in the channel are expected to be ebbing most of the today, reaching a maximum speed of 2.4 knots at about 1800. Over the next couple of days, the currents will be ebbing and flooding, reaching a maximum flood current speed of about 2.9 knots and maximum ebb current speed of 3.3 knots. These tidal currents could move any spilled oil into Galveston Bay or out into the Gulf up to about 10 miles, depending on the
On the evening of 24 June 2008, the Regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by Sector Mobile of two grounded barges carrying a combined total of 46,000 bbls of Vacuum Gas Oil near Dauphin Island. [SEP] The USCG reported that the barges were removed the same night at 2145 hrs local time without further incident. A USCG marine inspector was on-scene and reported that there was no damage and no pollution. [SEP] Reported location of the two grounded barges (map source, google). [SEP] On the evening of 24 June 2008, the Regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by Sector Mobile of two grounded barges carrying a combined total of 46,000 bbls of Vacuum Gas Oil near Dauphin Island. The M/V Mark L was piloting the two-barge tow and apparently just run outside of the channel. The barges are reported to be soft aground and no report of damage or release of product. A second tug is expected on-scene tonight to remove the vessels. High tide is predicted for 0900 hrs. The SSC will follow up with Sector Mobile in the morning. The potential risk of a failure and oil spill were report as low. [SEP] Vacuum Gas Oil, or VGO, is an intermediate petroleum process oil produced from a crude oil feedstock in a refinery vacuum distillation tower. Also known as cat feed, or catalytic cracker feedstock, VGO is further refined to make gasoline, No.2 oil, other products and byproducts. VGO is generally a waxy liquid, dark green to amber in color, with a boiling point range of between 315-560 ??C. VGO will float in fresh and saltwater (specific gravity generally near 0.90). [SEP] Reported location of the two grounded barges (map source, google).
Report -- First and Final:   Sector Boston's Update:   EPA OSCs Brennan and Condon arrived at the incident and coordinated withthe Incident Commander and MADEP.NSTAR and environmental response contractor Clean Harbors are on-sceneaddressing released oil in Muddy River.Source of release is an undergound conduit containing high voltageelectrical line and insulated with mineral oil (cable oil).  Cause of the release is still under investigation.Initial estimated quantity of 5000 gallons appears to be accurate.Release is secured with containment and recovery operations ongoing atlocations along the MuddyRiver.An estimated 1000-2000 gallons may reach the Charles River.NSTAR/Clean Harbor have deployed assets to contain and recover therelease if it reaches the CharlesRiver.--------------------SSC Report:    SSC was contacted at 1230 EDT by Sector Boston with concerns relative to the release, even though it was some distance from the coastal zone.  They wanted to both be prepared to respond and to provide assistance to the EPA OSC, if such assistance were to become necessary.NOAA/ERD chemist and senior life scientist were consulted.  Toxicity and potential for actionable impacts to the marine environment were deemed low due to the nature of the product (Luminol Type-2, a Petro-Canada product).SSC reported to Sector Boston and briefed the key response personnel.No further action from the USCG or NOAA is anticipated.  No further request for assistance from EPA is expected.Case ClosedSteve LehmannSSC [SEP] Locus
On the morning of 17JUN2008, an unknown sheen was reported on the beach of Robert Crown Memorial Beach, a bayfront park in Alameda, CA.  Subsequent inspection by USCG and CA OSPR field staff revealed dime to quarter-sized, sheening tarballs along a mile of shoreline.  Sector San Francisco notified the NOAA SSC shortly after 1700hrs and requested a NOAA hindcast trajectory to narrow down the potential sources for sampling. [SEP] Tide heights [SEP] Date; June 17, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery oil on SE side of Alameda I FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: Tarballs along the SE corner of Alameda I, San Francisco Bay, was reported this afternoon. The heaviest concentration of oil was reported at Robert Crown Memorial State Park and extended to the SE until the breakwater at the end of Shoreline Dr. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds have been from the W since about 1100 this morning. Wind speeds have been between 4 knots to 10 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis Conclusion: The most probably area for the source of oil was within 1/2 mile of the impacted beach at Robert Crown Memorial State Park. Discussion: The oiled beach is confined to about a 1 mile stretch of beach with the heaviest concentration at the Robert Crown Memorial State Park. This, along with the persistent winds from the W all afternoon indicate that the source was close to the impacted Park. If the spill had occurred off the northwestern section of Alameda Island, off the Alameda Naval Airstation, we would expect impacted shorelines along the SW end of the Island as well as where it was reported. If the spill had occurred in the main shipping channel in South Bay, we would expect the oil to have taken 6 hours or more to beach and this would result in a larger area of impact than what has been reported. There is a possibility that the oil could have exited San Leandro Channel between Alameda and Bay Farm Island during the afternoon ebb tide. However, if this were the case we would expect the heaviest concentrations of oil to be to the SE of the State Park. Also the fact that the extent of oil appears to end at the breakwater to the SE, would indicate that the oil moved from the NW to the SE along the beach, which would be consistent with a spill close to the State Park, and moving to the SE with the winds. [SEP] Map depicts location of Robert Crown Memorial Park.
The Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary notified the NOAA SSC at about noon on June 14 that the 27,000 ton Tanker Ioannis 1 was adrift 28 NM southwest of Buoy J off the northwest coast of Washington.  The vessel, heading south from Vancouver, B.C., had shut down it's engines for repairs. The tanker was reported to be carrying methyl glycol. The Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary requested a drift trajectory for the vessel. The vessel restarted its engines and was underway again by the afternoon of June 14.
The USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a pipeline failure 2.5 to 3 miles off the Louisiana coast. [SEP] FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A leak from a gas pipeline starting at 0838 hrs this morning was reported at location: 29??11'15.80"N--91??10'42.88"W. The location is about 2.4 miles offshore of Oyster Bayou, LA. An overflight in the early afternoon observed a broken sheen about 1 mile in length. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds this afternoon were generally from the southeast at 5-1o knots. That direction is expected to continue through Thursday, increasing to 10 to 15 knots Wednesday night. 2) Trajectory Analysis The condensate released from gas pipelines is generally light. The observation of a broken sheen of about 1 mile is consistent with this experience. If there are more small releases of a similar product, we expect a similar sheen of up to about 1 mile long to result. If there is a release after the winds pick up Wednesday night, the resulting sheen would probably be smaller and break up faster. We do not expect any noticeable shoreline impacts unless there is a much larger release. [SEP] SUBJECT: Weather forecast for gas pipeline sheen. WARNINGS: None SUNRISE/SUNSET: Sunday: Sunset 8:14 p.m. Monday: Sunrise 6:11 a.m. Sunset 8:15 p.m. FORECAST: Tonight: Southeast winds 5 to 10 knots, Seas 1 to 2 feet. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Wednesday: Southeast winds 5 to 10 knots, Seas 1 to 2 feet. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Wednesday Night: Southeast winds 10 to 15 knots, Seas 1 to 3 feet. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Thursday: Southeast winds 10 to 15 knots, Seas 1 to 3 feet. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Thursday Night: Southeast winds 10 to 15 knots, Seas 3 to 5 feet. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Friday: South winds 5 to 10 knots, Seas 3 to 5 feet. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] The USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a pipeline failure 2.5 to 3 miles off the Louisiana coast. The incident was initially observed at 8:48 AM local time on 10 June 2008. The NRC report was taken at noon, and the SSC notified at 9:35 PM with the request for a trajectory. The release is thought to be from pipeline transport offshore production gas and liquid condensate, and the reported sheens are reported as light, broken, and extending approximately one-mile from the source. The pressure is currently being bleed from the line (shut in). The initial trajectory analysis (if the field information is correct) suggests that the sheens should dissipate before shoreline impact. The USCG stated that they will follow up with a morning overflight. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
At 5:26 PM (local time) on 10 June 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a grounded sperm whale near Port Aransas, Texas.  At that time, the whale was reported alive and the USCG was seeking guidance. [SEP] At 5:26 PM (local time) on 10 June 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a grounded sperm whale near Port Aransas, Texas. At that time, the whale was reported alive and the USCG was seeking guidance. The SSC contacted Jim Jeansonne, a member of the ERD SSC team, to coordinate the consultation with the Marine Mammal Stranding network and the USCG Sector Corpus Christi. Follow up communications with the USCG by the SSC confirmed that the NMFS was engaged. It was also reported that the whale, a 27-foot female, was euthanized, and a necropsy would be performed the following day. Unless the situation changes, this report will constitute the initial and final hotline entry. Additional Information About Sperm Whales Once quite common in the Gulf of Mexico, sperm whales are now only occasionally observed. They are listed as endangered species under ESA and protected under the Marine Mammal Protection Act. Sperm whales can swim down to depths greater than 3,000 meters; apparently, limited in depth only by the time it takes to swim down and back to the surface. They are the largest of all toothed whales, making them the Earth's largest living carnivore. Sperm whales feed mainly on squid (including colossal squid and the giant squid), octopus and deepwater fishes, but it also reported to feed on sharks and skates. The correct scientific name for the sperm whale is currently unclear or under debate. The species is generally known as Physeter catodon, but Physeter macrocephalus is the name most commonly listed by NOAA. A total of 17 sperm whale strandings were documented in the northern Gulf of Mexico between 1997 and 2002. The best estimate of the abundance of sperm whales in the northern Gulf of Mexico was approximately 1,300 whales in 2003 (NOAA report). Probably the most remembered sperm whale grounding was in 1970, when a dead, 45-foot whale of this species beached in Oregon. This was the whale that was filled with a half-ton of dynamite and exploded???€? you have probably seen the video. For more information on these unique marine animals, view the following web site: http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/species/mammals/cetaceans/spermwhale.htm
This Hotline entry will be used to track and monitor all subsequent USCG support request for GI-47 until final repairs are completed.At approximately 0230 on 3 Jun2008 an estimated 9 barrels of crude oil was lost from a hurricane damaged platform off Port Fourchon, LA.  Sheen is reported as 2x8 miles in size.  Platform location: 28deg 57.01 min N Lat, 090deg 01.00 min W Long.  Leading edge of sheen is approx. 18 miles off Port Fourchon at 29deg 00 min N Lat, 89deg 51 min W Long.  NOAA ERD was contacted at 0900 to provide WX and trajectory support.  Additional, hurricane related, releases from this platform and block area will be added to this hotline incident. [SEP] Update, 22 Nov. 2008 No sheens were observed at present. This observation suggests that this latest leak has been mitigated. There remains a large amount of work to do restoring and shutting in the damaged wellheads from the 2005 hurricane season. [SEP] (photo credit, RP) [SEP] (photo provided by RP) [SEP] (image provided by RP) [SEP] Because of the need to maintain up to date Hotline activities, this general Hotline for the GI-47c repair operations has been closed. Incident specific request for support will be tracked as a new Hotline. Generally, the NRC Report Number will be included to help keep the incidents separated. This entry serves as the final or close out report. [SEP] (image provided by RP) [SEP] (photo credit, RP). [SEP] (photo credit, RP) [SEP] Platform: 28?? 57' 00" N by 090?? 01' 00" W Leading Edge: 29?? 00' N by 89?? 51' W [SEP] (photo credit, RP) [SEP] Date: June 3rd. 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Platform spill off Port Fourchon FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: Last night a reported sheen of 8 miles by 2 miles was reported from a platform off Louisiana at 28?? 57' 01"N by 090?? 01' 00"W. The leading edge of the sheen was reported to be 29?? 00' N by 89?? 51' W which is 18.1 miles off Port Fourchon. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Today: S winds at 5-10 knots. Tonight: S winds at 10-15 knots. Wednesday: S winds 15-20 knots. Thursday: SE winds 15-20 knots. Friday: SE winds 15-20 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis With the winds from the S and the 10 bbl estimate of oil lost, we would not expect any noticeable beach impacts. From this scenario we would expect a visible sheen of 5 - 8 miles extending to the N-NE from the platform. With the forecast wind shift on Thursday and Friday (to SE winds), if the oil continues to leak, there would be a possibility of scattered tarballs on the shoreline in the vicinity of Belle Pass by Friday. 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model. The exact type of oil was not reported, however several runs of the ADIOS II oil fate model for the forecast conditions indicate that about 50% of the oil will remain about 12 hours. Scattered tarballs may persist for several days. [SEP] Early this morning, 24 Nov. 2008, at about 0100 hrs (local time), a bubble of gas and condensate erupted near the barge creating an observable slick that extended 1.6 miles at the time of the morning overflight. The RP reports that C-14 well (the same well that was leaking last week) was discovered to be leaking in the annulus between the 10 3???4???€? and the 7 5/8???€? casing strings. Currently the plan is to install another pollution dome. The RP will be performing overflights on a twice daily basis, early in the morning and late evening until this problem is contained. In addition, a leak was observed at GI 40c. A small rosebud sheen was observed at that location. Apparently something was disturbed and the result is a small sheen. The sheen size is only 2 x 60 yds. The RP will continue to monitor this sheen.
Sector San Francisco notified the NOAA SSC at 0140hrs on 14MAY2008 that the Tug Independence allided with Tesoro's Avon Wharf in Martinez, CA damaging three 6-8 inch pipelines and releasing an unknown quantity of gasoline into the Carquinez Straits.  A trajectory estimate was requested. [SEP] Evening report, 14MAY2008: US Coast Guard's Sector San Francisco notified the NOAA SSC at 0140hrs on 14MAY2008 that the Tug Independence had allided with Tesoro's Avon Wharf in Martinez, CA and may have damaged three 6-8 inch pipelines containing gasoline and perhaps diesel fuel. Initial reports indicated an unknown quantity of gasoline had been released into the Carquinez Straits, though "major amounts" of product had been described in the water. A trajectory estimate was requested. The Avon Wharf is located east of the Benicia-Martinez Bridge on the south shoreline of the waterway. Information from the Incident Command Center indicated that the affected pipelines were static lines and that an estimated 1,500 gallons of gasoline were released. After daybreak, an overflight of the area revealed no discernable amounts of product on the water. Later on-scene information indicated that, though a 12-inch gas pipeline had been creased in the allision, only a small sampling line had actually been breached; releasing an estimated 5 gallons of gasoline. The USCG issued numerous press releases throughout the day and continues with the requisite accident investigation, though substantive pollution response efforts have concluded. JStout, NOAA SSC [SEP] Created & provided by GWatabayashi. [SEP] Sent: Wednesday, May 14, 2008 5:52 AM Based on NOAA trajectories, it is anticipated that the material in the water will dissipate by 0600T (local) leaving no recoverable product. Several pipes were damaged, at the dock, and assessments are being conducted to ensure the lines remain intact. The Marine Spill Response Corporation is on scene. -----Original Message----- Sent: Wednesday, May 14, 2008 05:05 AM  1. INCIDENT TYPE: Tug INDEPENDENT allided with Avon Warf damaging 01 gasoline pipelines 2. LOCATION: Tesoro Petroleum Facility - Suisun Bay, Martinez, CA 3. TIME OF INCIDENT: 140720Z MAY 08. 4. COMMANDER CENTER CONFERENCE CALL PLANNED FOR: 141300Z MAY 08. 5. AMPLIFYING INFORMATION: Update to case: Only one pipe believed to have been ruptured (250' of static line, Gasoline only, containing 1500 gallons of product). No known impact to waterway other than 1000 yd safety zone. Casualty investigators are on scene. Water temp 51 deg, air temp 54 deg -----Original Message----- From: RCCAlameda@uscg.mil Sent: Wednesday, May 14, 2008 04:21 AM Pacific Standard Time Clarification on previous reports; This was a single tug incident no barge. The pipe struck was a 12 inch in diameter, 250FT section and was a static line. Estimated spill is now 1,500 gallons of gas, not gas/diesel mixture [SEP] Date: May 14, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Gasoline Pipeline spill East end Carquinez Strait FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: At about 0020 PDT 3 pipelines were compromised and an estimated 1500 gallons of gasoline was lost from the Avon Pier at the east end of Carquinez Strait. The source is secured. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Light and variable winds this morning with increasing winds in the afternoon. 2) Trajectory Analysis We expect the ebb current which began at 0025 and ends at 0658 to dominate the movement of the sheen. With a 1500 gasoline spill we would expect a 1/2 - 1 mile sheen trending to the west and persisting for about 1- 1.5 hours. A larger spill of about 5000 gallons of gasoline would result in a sheen that extended to about the Benicia-Martinez Bridge and persisted for 1.5 - 2 hours. A 10,000 gallon gasoline spill would result in a sheen that extended about 1 mile west of the Benicia-Martinez Bridge and persist for about 2 - 3 hours. If a significant amount of heavier product like diesel was lost, a visible sheen could extend into San Pablo Bay and persist until the winds increased in the afternoon. 3) Oil Fate For a spill of 10,000 gallons or less of gasoline, we would not expect a visible sheen to persist for no more than 2 - 3 hours after the source was controlled. A diesel spill of several thousand gallons, under light wind conditions could persist into the morning and possible into the afternoon, depending upon how much was lost. Note if any gasoline collected in sheltered areas, not exposed to the tidal currents or winds, it could become a fire hazard. [SEP] Tidal Currents in Carquinez Straits [SEP] Tugboat strikes pipe, spilling fuel Henry K. Lee, Chronicle Staff Writer (05-14) 07:33 PDT MARTINEZ -- A tugboat struck and ruptured a pipeline near the Tesoro refinery in Martinez early today, spilling as much as 1,500 gallons of gasoline into the water, the Coast Guard said. The incident happened at 12:20 a.m. when the tugboat Independence struck three pipelines at the Avon wharf at Tesoro's Golden Eagle refinery on the southern shore of the Carquinez Strait, said Petty Officer Kevin Neff. One of the pipes, which is a foot in diameter, was damaged and began leaking fuel into the strait, which leads to San Francisco Bay. There were no vessels at the wharf and no activities there at the time of the collision, authorities said. No injuries have been reported. The pipe is considered a static line in that it was not actively transferring fuel at the time, Neff said. The fuel that spilled was any residual amount that was in the line, he said. The Avon wharf is used to load vessels for transport of motor fuels throughout the West Coast. The cause of the collision is under investigation. The four members of the crew on board the tugboat will be administered drug and alcohol tests as part of routine procedure, Neff said. Two Coast Guard boats from the Vallejo station responded to the scene, and a helicopter was sent to the area for a visual inspection. Coast Guard specialists in pollution response have also been dispatched from Novato. Vessel traffic in the area, about 1 1/2 miles east of the Benicia-Martinez Bridge, has been suspended temporarily until authorities determine the impact of the spill on the environment, authorities said. The spill is the latest release of pollutants into Bay Area waters. On May 5, about 3,300 gallons of toluene spilled from the Reaction Products plant in Richmond apparently killed between 200 and 300 fish in an irrigation canal leading to San Pablo Bay. Thieves had apparently climbed a chain link fence to get at the tanks and stole brass valve fittings, causing a leak. In November, the Cosco Busan container ship struck a tower of the Bay Bridge, spilling more than 50,000 gallons of fuel oil. In the past 16 years, bridges in the bay have been hit 50 times by ships. Eighteen of those were commercial vessels, according to the Coast Guard. On Jan. 10, a barge carrying 2 million gallons of oil crashed into the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge. No oil had spilled, but had that occurred, it would have dwarfed the Cosco Busan spill, authorities said. E-mail Henry K. Lee at hlee@sfchronicle.com. [SEP] Tide heights in Carquinez Straits
On May 9, 2008, the NOAA Emergency Response Division was contacted by US Coast Guard regarding a grounded barge "Energy 11102" at Bolivar Roads, TX.  The 420 foot barge is loaded with more than 100,000 bbls of #2 fuel.  There is no indication of a spill at this time but USCG requests weather and trajectory support. [SEP] At approximately 1100 hrs (local time) lightering had begun. No additional information is currently available. NOAA has provided a Resources at Risk analysis at the request of the USCG. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator is standing by to assist if needed. [SEP] Heights [SEP] Heights [SEP] PORTS WL forecast [SEP] The map shown was composed from the TGLO-NOAA Upper Texas Coast Atlas (page 37, 38, 40, and 41). [SEP] At approx. 1700 hrs (local time), the barge was refloated. At least 20,000 bbls of fuel oil was lightered in the process. Unless some unexpected incident would occur, this report will serve as the final hotline update. [SEP] Map marking reported barge location. No spill at this time. [SEP] PORTS water level [SEP] Tides [SEP] Tides [SEP] PORTS currents [SEP] Note moderate downcoast currents off Galveston.
F/V with 400 gallons of diesel grounded last night at the entrance to Kewalo Basin.  No report of oil in the water.  This is a potential. [SEP] http://www.honoluluadvertiser.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=2008805040362 Damaged fishing boat freed, then sunk Post a comment Recommend Advertiser Staff A stranded fishing vessel pulled off the reef outside Kewalo Basin was sunk off Honolulu late yesterday afternoon, officials said. Commercial salvage company Cates International and a tug boat helped free the Robin, a 47-foot, steel-hull commercial longline fishing vessel, at high tide yesterday, but the boat could not be saved, according to the Department of Land and Natural Resources. The ship had run aground Thursday. It was towed to an area about three miles outside the harbor and sunk in about 1,200 feet of water with about 8,000 pounds of fish still in its hold. [SEP] The actual location of the vessel was not report. The CG person I talked to didn't know which side of the channel the vessel was ground on. I would guess Pt Panic, the west side because of the trade winds. [SEP] SURF ZONE FORECAST NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE HONOLULU HI 900 AM HST FRI MAY 2 2008 OAHU- 900 AM HST FRI MAY 2 2008 Surf along south facing shores will be 5 to 7 feet today decreasing to 4 to 6 feet Saturday. [SEP] http://cgvi.uscg.mil/media/main.php?g2_itemId=266758
A brown sheen of about 20 miles in diameter, located about 60 miles east of Canaveral Florida was reported by a commercial airliner. The Coast Guard has contacted a ship in the region to try to get on scene observations. It is not known at this time whether the sheen is oil, another material, or a natural phenomenon. Coast Guard requested a trajectory analysis in case it turns out to be oil. [SEP] Sector Jacksonville reports that there have been no further observations or reports of the slick, and no photography from the initial observation. The merchant ship in the area reported nothing unusual. USCG is standing by in case somebody else reports something, but they have no plans to send out an aircraft or cutter. Sector thanked us for our trajectory product but indicated that they did not require any further assistance unless the observation is verified by another observer.
The Tug DOROTHY ANN ran aground on April 21, 2008 and released approximately 30 gallons of 150Weight Gear oil into Marquette Harbor.  The spill was immediately contained by boom aboard the tug.  On April 22, 2008 the NOAA SSC was contacted by Sector Sault Ste Marie for trajectory information for the potential release of 300 gallons of gear oil that is believed to be in the azipod which was knocked off the vessel when it went aground. [SEP] More pic. and vessel specifications at http://www.boatnerd.com/pictures/fleet/dorothyann.htm [SEP] See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Azipod for more details and pictures For those non-mariners, an azipod is the registered brand name of the ABB Group for their azimuth thruster. These are marine propulsion units consisting of electrically driven propellers mounted on a steerable pod. The pod's propeller usually faces forward, as in this puller (or tractor) configuration, the propeller is more efficient. In addition, because it can rotate around its mount axis, the pod can apply its thrust force in any direction. Azimuth thrusters allow ships to be more maneuverable and enable them to travel backward nearly as easily as they can travel forward. [SEP] Crews clean oil spill in Marquette's Lower Harbor by The Associated Press Friday April 25, 2008, 5:16 AM MARQUETTE -- Crews have cleaned up an oil spill in the Lower Harbor in Marquette. The area was closed after the U.S. Coast Guard was notified of the leak on Monday. The tugboat was pushing a barge when a mechanical thruster broke off near the Shiras Generating Plant. Coast Guard officials said environmental contractors have been able to collect more than 30 gallons of oil using a vacuum truck. They picked up more oiled debris from the shoreline. Divers have located the thruster. The area is surrounded by a containment boom, and boaters are asked to stay away. A crane and salvage barge will try to recover the thruster by the weekend. http://www.mlive.com/news/index.ssf/2008/04/crews_clean_oil_spill_in_marqu.html [SEP] TUG DOROTHY ANN, MARQUETTE, MI 1430 EDT, Tuesday April 22, 2008 Sunset (04/22): 2048 Sunrise (04/23): 0648 Sunset (04/23): 2049 Forecast Winds: Today: winds are predicted to be from the S at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the N to NW at 5-10 knots. Wednesday: winds are expected to be from the N to NW at 5-10 knots. Thursday: winds are predicted to be from the S to SE at 15-20 knots. Friday: winds are forecast to be from the S to SE 15-20 knots becoming light and variable late in the day. Seas: Today: seas are expected to be 2 feet or less. Tonight: seas are forecast to be 2 feet or less. Wednesday: seas are predicted to be 2 feet or less. Thursday: seas are expected to be 2 feet or less. Friday: seas are forecast to be 2 feet or less. Precipitation: Today: showers and thunderstorms are expected. Tonight: partly cloudy with a chance of showers and thunderstorms. Wednesday: no precipitation is forecast. However, areas of fog are expected. Thursday: partly sunny with a chance of showers and thunderstorms late. Friday: showers and thunderstorms are expected. Temperature: the high is expected to be in the upper 50's and the low is forecast to be in the upper 30's. [SEP] On Friday April 25, 2008 the SSC was notified by Sector personnel that the Azipod was recovered with no release of gear oil. It was determined that the cause of the grounding was a rudder that had been lost by another vessel. The Tug Dorothy Ann struck the submerged rudder removing it's azipod. [SEP] TIME: 1500 EDT Tuesday April 22, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Elizabeth Jones FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Tug Dorothy Ann For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications for a release of gear oil near Marquette Harbor, MI. The Tug Dorothy Ann struck bottom and lost its Azipod, which contains about 300 gallons of 150 weight gear oil. The location is reported to be: 46??32.04'N--087??23.21'W. We were asked for a trajectory forecast for any released gear oil. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WINDS: Today: from the S at 10-15 knots. Tonight and Wednesday: from the N to NW at 5-10 knots. Thursday and Friday: from the S to SE at 15-20 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: Any gear oil released from the Azipod will float to the surface, and form a sheen. Once on the surface, it will tend to move with the wind. If released today or late in the week, during the expected south winds, it will move to the north, into the harbor, impacting the shorelines and docks in the northwest corner of the harbor. If it is released during the expected the north and northwest winds tonight and tomorrow, it will move to the south and southeast, perhaps reaching the shore south of the harbor, or heading out into the lake, depending on how much westerly component there is to the wind. 3) OIL FATE: The gear oil is reported to be a 150 weight Shell Omala gear oil. It has the following properties: density: 0.897kg/l viscosity: 150 cSt at 40??C pour point: -21??C We expect it will spread rapidly into a thin slick. It will not evaporate, and it will disperse fairly readily in high energy conditions without the addition of chemical dispersants. In general, lubricating oils are of low to moderate aquatic toxicity. While the base oils used in the production of lubricating oils are generally of extremely low toxicity to aquatic organisms, the large number of different additives, in varying amounts, make it impossible to issue more specific statements, unless details of the composition (usually proprietary) are known. If released during the light winds expected tonight and Wednesday, the sheen could persist. However with the higher predicted winds, we expect the sheen to disperse within a few days.
Two patches of crude oil were reported by MSU Houma in a small system of channels between Lake Long and the Intracoastal Waterway (ICW). It is suspected that the spill is from the a 2" pipe from a nearby production facility: the Kriti Exploration Co, Lake Long Facility.It is estimated that the total released is about 10-15 bbls. [SEP] Location of reported spill (map prepared by LOSCO). [SEP] LAKE LONG PIPELINE SPILL, HOUMA, LA 1300 CDT, Friday April 18, 2008 Sunset (04/18): 1932 Sunrise (04/19): 0632 Sunset (04/19): 1932 Forecast Winds: Today: winds are predicted to be from the S at 15 knots. Tonight: winds are forecast to be from the N at 10-15 knots. Saturday: winds are expected to be from the N at 5-10 knots becoming light and variable. Sunday: : winds are predicted to be from the SE at 5-15 knots. Monday: winds are forecast to be from the S at 5-10 knots. Seas: Today: light chop on inland waters. Tonight: light chop on inland waters. Saturday: inland waters are expected to be calm. Sunday: inland waters are expected to be calm. Monday: inland waters are expected to be calm. Precipitation: Today: showers and thunderstorms are expected. Tonight: showers and thunderstorms are likely. Saturday: no precipitation is forecast. Sunday: no precipitation is expected. Monday: no precipitation is predicted. Temperature: the high is expected to be in the upper 70's and the low is forecast to be in the mid 50's. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] On 18 April 2008, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by the Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office (LOSCO) of a crude oil spill in Lake Long, South Louisiana. A flow line ruptured resulting in an estimated 10 to 15 barrels of oil at the facility platform and into the adjacent waters. The flow line (2 inch size) was shut in and isolated. Field personnel deployed containment boom in an attempt to contain the oil on the water. An Oil Spill Response organization (OSRO) is on scene, and the USCG has sent representatives to the site. As follow up, USCG Marine Safety Unit Houma has requested a trajectory analysis. This information was passed on. [SEP] TIME: 1300 CDT Friday, April 18, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Crude Spill near Lake Long, Louisiana For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a release of crude oil suspected to be from a pipeline near Lake Long, LA. There were reported to be two patches of of oil, at Locations: 29??33'59.93"N--090??33'00.01"W and 29??33'57.94"N--090??32'46.74"W. It is estimated that the total released is about 10-15 bbls. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today: Winds from the South at 15 knots. Tonight: Winds from the Northwest a 10-15 knots. Saturday: Winds from the North at 5-10 knots, becoming light and variable. 2) TRAJECTORY: The spill location is in a small system of channels between Lake Long and the Intracoastal Waterway (ICW). The wind is currently from the south, and the currents in the channel are reported to be moving to the northwest. The channels are surrounded by brackish marsh. Any floating oil will be moved primarily by the winds until beached on the shoreline. Floating oil will also be moved by the currents in the channels, though those currents are expected to be small. Under today's conditions, we expect the oil to continue to move to the northwest. Some oil may make it into the surrounding marsh, depending on how porous the sides of the channels are and how high the water level is. Tonight, the winds are expected to shift to be from the northwest. Any oil that is still floating will tend to reverse direction, moving to the south and east. The wind may also serve to reverse the currents in the channels, moving oil toward the South, and toward the ICW, so some oil may make in into the ICW by Saturday morning, much of the oil will beach on the south side of the channel by the wind. With the light and variable winds predicted for Saturday afternoon, any remaining floating oil will drift with the currents in the ICW, probably to the east, but it is hard to know which way the current flow is at that location, and it may reverse with the tides. On scene observations about the current in the ICW would help refine this estimate. 3) OIL FATE: The following is an oil budget table generated by NOAA's Adios oil weathering model for a generic Louisiana Crude. The results indicate that about 40 percent of the oil will have likely evaporated in the first 24 hours, and the rest will remain fairly persistent. Oil Name = LOUISIANA API = 34.5 Pour Point = -19 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = 0.5 ft Water Temperature = 65 deg F Time of Initial Release = April 3, 1000 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 15.0 bbl ________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Remaining Spill bbl percent percent 1 15.0 - 25 - 75 2 15.0 30 70 4 15.0 - 33 - 67 6 15.0 35 65 8 15.0 - 36 - 64 10 15.0 36 64 12 15.0 - 37 - 63 18 15.0 38 62 24 15.0 - 38 - 62 30 15.0 39 61 36 15.0 - 39 - 61 42 15.0 39 61 48 15.0 - 40 - 60 54 15.0 40 60 60 15.0 - 40 - 60 66 15.0 40 60 72 15.0 - 41 - 59 78 15.0 41 59 84 15.0 - 41 - 59 90 15.0 41 59 96 15.0 - 41 - 59 102 15.0 42 58 108 15.0 - 42 - 58 114 15.0 42 58 120 15.0 - 42 - 58
On Monday, 14 April 2008, the Regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by USCG Sector New Orleans of a small spill near Bayou Couba in South Louisiana.  The Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's office (LOSCO) also provided prompt notification and updates.  At the time it was reported as a small spill, maybe 4 to 5 bbls, and contained.  There were no issues identified that required direct NOAA support.  Since then, there has been on-scene investigation by the USCG, and the USCG has asked for assistance relative to the response and cleanup.  One concern identified was marsh and vegetation impacts during the cleanup (OSRO cut trees down/paths made in vegetation).  USCG plans an overflight of the impacted area.  The NOAA SSC will meet with the USCG in the morning.   The location of the spill is within the Salvador State Wildlife Management Area. [SEP] Bayou Couba site visit. [SEP] USCG made a return visit to Bayou Couba on April 16th, 2008. Most of the oil was cleaned up on the water. The soil still remains saturated with oil. Some of the trees were cut down (see photo)to allow clearance to the spill. The company will go into maintenance phase beginning April 17th, 2008. USCG concurs with this decision. The company will be required to conduct site visits 3 times per week for the next two weeks. USCG, NOAA SSC, LAWLF, and LADEQ will revisit the site in two weeks. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Bayou Couba site visit. [SEP] The USCG, NOAA SSC, and LA Wildlife and Fisheries visited the site on Wednesday, April 30th 2008. The OSRO is in maintenance phase at this time and abides by any additional instructions given by the USCG. Another site visit is being planned for two weeks out again. [SEP] Bayou Cuba update, 19 June 2008. They are still in a passive clean up phase and will be for the foreseeable future unless LAWF gives then permission to do any thing else other then passive clean up operations. The soil is contaminated with crude oil, but no pockets of oil remain in the vicinity. The main problem they will have is when it rains or floods there will continue to be puddles of sheen come up do to the soil contamination. They are using sorbent left in place to soak up any oil or heavy sheen that might come up from the soil getting wet. ES&H visits the site once a week to change out the sorbents. They have hard boom placed in front of the spill site to prevent any crude oil from escaping if some was to leak in to the water way. Until we find out what plans are for the soil contamination, the site will not be revisitied. Update provided by: MST1 Nathan Thompson, USCG Sector New Orleans, Incident Management Division [SEP] On Monday, 14 April 2008, the Regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by USCG Sector New Orleans of a small spill near Bayou Couba in South Louisiana. The Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's office (LOSCO) also provided prompt notification and updates. At the time it was reported as a small spill, maybe 4 to 5 bbls, and contained. There were no issues identified that required direct NOAA support. Since then, there has been on-scene investigation by the USCG, and the USCG has asked for assistance relative to the response and cleanup. One concern identified was marsh and vegetation impacts during the cleanup (OSRO cut trees down/paths made in vegetation). USCG plans an overflight of the impacted area. The NOAA SSC will meet with the USCG in the morning. The location of the spill is within the Salvador State Wildlife Management Area. The following background Information was derived from a report provided by the USCG. On the evening of 13 April 2008, Sector New Orleans received a report of a 20 ft by 15 ft sheen on Bayou Couba in the Salvador State Wildlife Management Area. A USCG Pollution Investigation team was dispatched the next morning (Sunday, 13 April 2008). According to Dune Energy (the RP), the spill came from a dead 2 inch flow line from the North side of the Bayou Couba Facility. The facility noticed the spill because of dead hyacinth and vegetation in the area. Upon further investigation they noticed that the 2'' flow line was leaking. Dune Energy did not know how long the flow line had been leaking. Upon notice, the facility immediately shut in the North side of the facility and deployed 150 ft of hard boom in the affected area. The flow line was cut off and capped with a gauge to secure and determine if any pressure was still built up in the line. Dune Energy has accepted full responsibility for the spill and has hired an OSRO (E.S. & H) to clean up the spill. The OSRO arrived at approximately 0800 Sunday and deployed a drum skimmer to recover oil. Pads and absorbent boom was also deployed. The first reported amount of crude oil was 1 bbl, which was estimated in the dark. From further investigation by the USCG suggest that the spill is more likely 4-5 barrels. [SEP] Bayou Couba Incident - Boomed area - Photo COurtesy of USCG [SEP] Bayou Couba Incident - Oil and Cut trees - Photo courtesy of USCG
USCG Sector Tampa/St Petersburg notified the SSC that the tug Yankee with Barge DBL 151 grounded at 1700 EST today (2Apr08) south of marker 14 in Egmont Channel, just outside of Tampa Bay, FL at position 27-36.39 N: 082-48.92W. The barge is fuly loaded with 118,000 Bbls of #6 HFO. No pollution has occurred at this time. The barge is on a sand dredge spoil bottom and out of the way of traffic. Refloat attempt will be tried in the morning. NOAA is generating weather forecasts, tides and currents, oil fate and an initial trajectory assessment based on tidal excursion and range along with forecast weather. Vessel was successfully refloated after lightering a portion of the cargo without reported pollution before dark on Friday, April 4, 2008. [SEP] Resources at Risk for T/B DBL-151, Tampa Bay, FL I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 1200 on 3 April 2008 based on the grounding of the tug Yankee and the tank barge DBL-151 south of marker 14 in Egmont Channel, Tampa Bay, FL. The barge is fully loaded with 118,000 Bbls of #6 heavy fuel oil. Check ResponseLink for maps of the grounding site. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report extends from the entrance to Tampa Bay north to Indian Rocks Beach. Consult other ResponseLink reports for oil trajectory information. III. Expected Behavior of No. 6 Heavy Fuel Oils There can be large differences among heavy fuel oils in terms of how they are expected to behave when spilled in the environment. Depending on the density, they will float or not float; depending on the viscosity, pour point, and ambient temperatures, they will spread into slicks or congeal into tarballs and tarmats; depending on what they were blended with, they can change properties over time. A summary of their expected behavior when spilled on water is: - Floating heavy fuel oil will usually spread into thick slicks which can contain large amounts of oil. Oil recovery by skimmers and vacuum pumps can be very effective, particularly early in the spill. - Very little of these viscous oils is likely to mix into the water column. It can form thick streamers or, under strong wind conditions, break into patches and tarballs. - They will be very persistent oils and the spilled oil can be carried long distances by winds and currents. - The specific gravity of a particular No. 6 heavy fuel oil can vary widely, from 0.95 to greater than 1.03. - Floating oil could potentially sink once it strands on the shoreline, picks up sediment, and then is eroded by wave action. - Heavy fuel oil can be very viscous and sticky, meaning that stranded oil tends to remain on the surface rather than penetrate sediments. Light accumulations usually form a "bath-tub ring" at the high-water line; heavy accumulations can pool on the surface. - Shoreline cleanup can be very effective, particularly soon after the spill before the oil weathers, becoming stickier and even more viscous. Removal is needed because degradation rates for heavy oils are very slow, taking months to years. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline habitats along the outer shore are dominated by sand beaches. The tidal inlets are bordered by seawalls and riprap structures. Inside the bays, there are extensive seawalls in developed areas and mangroves along natural shorelines. Heavy fuel oils tend to heavily coat the intertidal zone, be it seawalls or mangrove prop roots. Tidal heights are increasing for the next few days, so spilled oil could contaminate increasingly larger areas. V. Biological Resources at Risk Birds This area has a rich avifauna. Listed species of particular concern include: Federally and State threatened piping plovers that occur on outer beaches and sand flats; State threatened snowy plovers nesting on the north tip of Mullet Key; State threatened least terns nesting on Egmont and Passage Key and other small keys north of Mullet Key; and Florida scrub jay nesting on Passage Key. There are many shore birds and wading birds in the area, many of which are nesting (e.g., black skimmers, oystercatcher, royal tern). Double-crested cormorants are very common. A spill of heavy fuel oil poses a significant risk to all the birds in the region. Many of these birds feed and rest on intertidal beaches and flats in large numbers. This oil can heavily coat the feathers, leading to death by hyperthermia and ingestion during attempts to preen. Oiled birds can contaminate eggs and chicks in the nest. Fish and Shellfish There are numerous species of fish throughout the bay and coastal waters. Key species include: snook (spawning), drum (spawning), crevelle jack (juveniles and adults), seatrout(spawning), spot and pompano (juveniles), pinfish (spawning), and Gulf flounder and Spanish mackerel (adults). Therefore, there will be juveniles of many important commercial and recreational species present. Heavy fuel oils do not tend to cause significant acute mortality, but the persistent oil can cause very significant sublethal and chronic effects. Shellfish are also abundant and include oysters, blue crabs, hard clams, spiny lobster, and pink shrimp. Shrimp are spawning at this time. Oysters in the intertidal zone may be heavily coated. If the oil accumulates on the seafloor, many of these shellfish species are at risk from fouling and long-term exposure. Sea Turtles Three species of sea turtles are nesting at this time: Loggerhead sea turtles on many of the outer beaches, Kemp's ridley sea turtle on Treasure Island north to Indian Rocks Beach, and green sea turtles on Mullet Key. Adults will be concentrating in nearshore waters. Nesting females may crawl across oiled beaches to reach nest sites. Adults and juveniles can mistake tarballs for food items, leading to fouling of mouth and flippers. Marine Mammals The West Indian manatee (Federal and State endangered) is common inside the bays. Heavy fuel oil could irritate eyes, nose, and mouth parts. VI. Human-Use Resources The entire area has heavy recreational and commercial use and value. Managed areas along the outer coast include Egmont Key and Passage Key National Wildlife Refuges, Egmont Key State Park, Fort Desoto State Park on Mullet Key, Pinellas County Aquatic Preserve which covers 30,000 acres of submerged lands from Mullet Key to the Anclote River. [SEP] Attached [SEP] Attached are two oil spill scenarios. One assumes the spill starts at the beginning of the flood on 4/3 - 0800 EDT. It shows the maximum extent of the oil inside of Tampa Bay at the end of the flood. The other assumes the spill starts at the beginning of the ebb on 4/3 - 1400 EDT. It shows the extent of the oil at the end of the ebb. Discussion: Overall the winds are expected to be primarily from the E to SSE over the next few days. This will tend to keep most of the spilled oil outside of Tampa Bay. If the oil is spilled at the start of a flood a fraction of the oil will enter the entrance to the Bay and beach along the north shore of the entrance. Over the next few days the bulk of any oil spilled is expected to move offshore and to the north with winds and currents. If the oil should spill, please call Brad Benggio and notify him. We will rerun the model with the exact start time of the spill and an updated weather forecast. [SEP] The Coast Guard monitored the aground tug/barge overnight and noted no change in ops or position. A Coast Guard helicopter over flew the grounded vessel and confirmed no leaking from the barge. As of 1000, Coast Guard has stood up an ICS to included DEP, FWRI and NOAA. K-SEA (responsible party) are drafting a lightering plan, should it become necessary to off load product in order to float the vessel. CG will review these plans and COTP will approve prior to any action being taken. Three tug boats (Buccaneer, Tampa and Gasparilla) are on scene to attempt to pull the tug/barge at each high tide interval. [SEP] SPOT Forecast for DBL 151 barge outside of Tampa Bay 1130 EDT, April 2, 2008 April 3 Sunrise 0717 EDT Sunset 1949 April 4 Sunrise 0716 Sunset 1950 Forecast: Winds: Wednesday night: Winds from the E at 5 - 10 knots Thursday morning: Winds from the SE at 5 - 8 knots Thursday afternoon: Between 1200 and 1400 sea breeze will begin and winds will become 4 - 6 knots from the SW Between 1600 and 1800 winds will become WNW at 4-8 knots Thursday night: Light and variable winds early evening becoming SE at 10 - 12 knots after midnight Friday morning: SSE winds at 10 - 12 knots Friday afternoon: Winds 10 - 15 knots from the SSW Seas: Wednesday night: 1 foot Thursday: 1 foot Friday: 1 - 2 feet Precipitation: 20 - 30% chance of thundershowers on Thursday afternoon 20 - 30% chance of thundershowers on Friday afternoon Extended outlook: The strongest winds are expected Friday night at 10 -
On Saturday evening, 15 March 2008, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a grounded fishing vessel on the coast at Rockefeller Wildlife Refuge in SW Louisiana. [SEP] Photograph provided by USCG showing the F/V MISS LISA aground. [SEP] Photograph provided by USCG showing the F/V MISS LISA aground. Same photo as previous entry, but zoomed in on the shrimping vessel. [SEP] ESI Atlas Map attached as initial RAR. [SEP] F/V MISS LISA, Rockerfeller Refuge, LA 1415 CDT, Wednesday March 19, 2008 Sunset (March 19) 1924 Sunrise (March 20) 0716 Sunset (March 20) 1925 SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY IN EFFECT THROUGH THURSDAY MORNING Forecast: Tonight: N winds at 15-20 knots. Thursday: NE winds 10-5 knots becoming E at 5-10 knots in the afternoon. Thursday night: SE winds 5-10 knots. Friday: S winds at 5-10 knots. Saturday: E winds at 10-15 knots. Seas: Tonight: seas 2-3 feet coastal bays rough. Thursday: 2-3 feet coastal bays choppy. Thursday night: seas 2-3 feet coastal bays smooth. Friday: seas 2-3 feet coastal bays light chop. Saturday: seas 2-3 feet coastal bays light chop. Precipitation: Tonight: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Thursday: no precipitation is forecast. Tonight: no precipitation is forecast. Thursday: no precipitation is predicted. Thursday no precipitation is expected. Friday: no precipitation is forecast. Saturday: no precipitation is predicted. Temperature: High is forecast to be near 70, with the low predicted to be in the mid 50's. [SEP] Resources at Risk [SEP] The vessel remains grounded and there are no observed sheens. The USCG reported on the morning of 16 March that the vessel remains at the same location as previously reported. The owner plans to make repairs and remove the vessel over the next couple of days. There was discussion for the potential of lightering the 1000 gallons of diesel fuel, but based on all of the current information, the steel hulled vessel appears to be intact. To lighter the vessel would probably have forced access from the marsh to the beach. Given the low threat relative to the possible collateral physical impacts and the apparent integrity of the vessel at present, the USCG decided to give the owner a couple of days to resolve the situation. . Weather, Tides, and Potential for Vessel Movement If the E wind today doesn't move the vessel, then it would probably not move any real distance for the next couple of days. The vessel extraction would have to buck a S wind on Tuesday. This is good and bad. The wind will help stack some waves to get the boat loose, but then the pull must overcome those same winds and waves to get it off the beach and into deeper water (but I'm no salvor). I hope they have some good line. For Monday, the low tide is predicted for 6:10 AM and the high 1:23 PM. On Tuesday the high tide will actually be a little earlier because we are approaching a series of mixed semidiurnal tides (I call these funky tides), but there should still be mid-day high water periods. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator Cameron Parish Wx (NWS Lake Charles) Rest Of Today...Mostly sunny and breezy. Highs in the mid 70s. East winds 20 to 25 mph. Tonight...Partly cloudy and breezy. Lows in the lower 60s. Southeast winds around 20 mph and gusty. Monday...Partly cloudy. Breezy with isolated showers and thunderstorms in the afternoon. Highs in the lower 80s. Southeast winds 15 to 25 mph. Monday Night...Mostly cloudy. Slight chance of showers and isolated thunderstorms after midnight. Lows in the upper 60s. Southeast winds 15 to 25 mph. Chance of rain 20 percent. Tuesday...Mostly cloudy. Scattered showers and thunderstorms in the morning...then numerous showers and thunderstorms in the afternoon. Windy. Some thunderstorms may produce heavy rainfall in the morning along with damaging winds in the afternoon. Highs in the upper 70s. South winds 20 to 30 mph. Chance of rain 70 percent. [SEP] Tides [SEP] SSC spoke with the USCG regarding the fuel lightering operations. Incidentally, there was little to no fuel aboard. USCG divers were sent down to check to hull integrity and no breeches were found. It seems as though the F/V Miss Lisa has been abandoned and will be salvaged at a later time. The USCG considers this incident closed. [SEP] On Saturday evening, 15 March 2008, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a grounded fishing vessel on the coast at Rockefeller Wildlife Refuge in SW Louisiana. The USCG requested a trajectory analysis should there be any loss of fuel. The vessel was reported to have 1000 gallons of diesel on-board. The vessel was observed at 1100 hrs local time at the following position: 29?? 35.6 N Lat. 092?? 39.8 W Long. The vessel was reported to have been abandoned the day before and was initially tied off to a rig to the E. At some point, the vessel came loose. Analysis of Available Information During the time of the grounding, sometime before 1100 hrs today, the winds were SW and the coastal current was from the E. On 14 March, there were S winds so the movement and grounding would seem to fit the information provided. The bigger question is if it remains aground? The high tide at the Mermentau River inlet, which is to the W of the grounding location, was at 1253 hrs on 15 March. That was only a few hours after the vessel was observed onshore and the winds were expected to shift with a northerly, offshore, component at about the same time. There is a chance that vessel refloated and drifted offshore. If it didn't drift off in the early afternoon, it is expected to still be in roughly the same location on the morning of 16 March. The next high tide is expected around 1300 hrs on Sunday, 16 March. At that time, the winds are forecasted to be out of the E at 10 to 20 mph. It is possible that the vessel could refloat under such a scenario and drift to the west. One determining factor would be just how hard aground the vessel rests. If the vessel did drift off the beach during the last high tide (sometime after lunch on 15 March), it would have been blown offshore by an N wind. The coastal current is to the west, so the combined movement would be to the SW then more westerly as the winds continued to clock around. Given the uncertainties and a lack of any real time observations, attempting to generate an accurate trajectory for the vessel would be difficult. Had there been an observation of the vessel afloat (if it did refloat) with a time and location this evening, NOAA could have provided a more detailed analysis. The NOAA SSC discussed the above analysis with one of the NOAA Emergency Response Division oceanographers (and that was fortunate because the initial tide information that the SSC had viewed on-line was wrong). In short, we both agreed that given the uncertainty and lack of any real-time observations since the morning report, we could not provide a more detailed trajectory analysis (or one with a high degree of accuracy) if the vessel had refloated. Pollution Threat Diesel fuel is not generally considered a persistent oil. Any released diesel fuel would be expected to spread rapidly and dissipate due to evaporation and natural dispersion. The reported volume was 1000 gallons of diesel fuel and probably less than 100 gallons of lube oil. This would suggest that the threat is relatively low based on volume, but diesel fuel is toxic and the vessel is already in the nearshore environment. Any diesel fuel spilled at the grounding site would be expected to be from a fracture and leak over a period of hours. With the falling tide and N winds forecasted for yesterday afternoon and into the night, this would generally suggest an offshore transport and the diesel would dissipate as described above. Diesel sheen extending several miles would be possible and threaten birds that may be feeding in the area as well as nearshore aquatic marine life. As the winds shift to the E by morning, the threat would extend several miles down the coast to the W. The USCG is expected to conduct a morning overflight to assess the position of the vessel and any pollution release. The NOAA SSC requested to be notified if there was any observation of sheen or if the vessel had moved. If the vessel was adrift, the SSC requested to be provided the time and location of the observation to coordinate a better estimate as to where it might drift and the potential to reground. [SEP] Approximate location as reported for 1100 hrs on 15 March 2008 (credit, NOAA). [SEP] F/V MISS LISA, Rockerfeller Refuge, LA 1430 CDT, Monday March 17, 2008 Sunset (March 17) 1923 Sunrise (March 18) 0719 Sunset (March 18) 1923 SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY IN EFFECT THROUGH WEDNESDAY EVENING Forecast: Tonight: SE winds at 20-30
On Sunday afternoon, 2 March 2008, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by the Texas General Land Office of a grounded tanker near Corpus Christi, TX.  There is no oil reported spilled at present. [SEP] Predicted Tide (provided by Dr. Buzz Martin, TGLO) [SEP] Location plotted on ESI Atlas Map (Credit, Dr. Buzz Martin, TGLO). [SEP] On Sunday afternoon, 2 March 2008, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by the Texas General Land Office (TGLO) of a grounded tanker near Corpus Christi, TX. There is no oil reported spilled, but the State of Texas SSC, Dr. Buzz Martin, did generate a potential threat analysis and trajectory should the situation change. The M/V EOS, a double hulled tanker carrying 300,000 metric tons of crude (non-specified, but probably Venezuelan), lost propulsion and ran aground on the edge of the Corpus Christi Ship Channel. The reported grounding was at 27?? 49' 48.18" N Lat., 097?? 08' 17.34" W Long. Based on Dr. Buzz Martin's analysis, the strength of the forecasted winds make the winds the primary driver for any spilled oil movement over the next several days. In the event of an oil release, SE winds would drive the oil towards the islands and seagrass beds of Redfish Bay in the vicinity of Dagger Island and Dagger Point. As the winds shifts to the SW (Tuesday morning) the threat would move easterly towards Ransom Point. As the winds continue changing in a clockwise manner to the NW (Monday evening), the threat migrates to resources south of the grounding site such as Mustang and Pelican Island. See attached trajectory for additional information. Again, this is only a notification at present. There has not been a report of any oil released, and the USCG has not requested any additional support from NOAA. The location of the grounding is mostly muddy substrate, which would reduce the risk of a release. The NOAA SSC will follow up with both the USCG and TGLO to up date this report. [SEP] The following includes a marine forecast, tidal predications, verbal trajectory and resources at risk. Attachments include map of grounding site (27 49 48.18N, 97 08 17.34W ) and tidal prediction chart. 1) Marine Forecast from NOAA NWS TODAY (March 2, 2008), SOUTHEAST WIND 15 TO 20 KNOTS INCREASING TO AROUND 25 KNOTS WITH GUSTS TO 30 KNOTS BY THE AFTERNOON. BAYS CHOPPY TO ROUGH. A SLIGHT CHANCE OF SHOWERS. TONIGHT, SOUTHEAST WIND 20 TO 25 KNOTS. BAYS CHOPPY TO OCCASIONALLY ROUGH. A SLIGHT CHANCE OF SHOWERS. MONDAY, SOUTHWEST WIND 15 TO 20 KNOTS BECOMING NORTHWEST 25 TO 30 KNOTS IN THE AFTERNOON. BAYS CHOPPY INCREASING TO ROUGH TO OCCASIONALLY VERY ROUGH IN THE AFTERNOON. A CHANCE OF SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS IN THE MORNING. MONDAY NIGHT, NORTHWEST WIND 25 TO 30 KNOTS DECREASING TO 20 TO 25 KNOTS AFTER MIDNIGHT. BAYS ROUGH TO OCCASIONALLY VERY ROUGH DECREASING TO CHOPPY TO ROUGH AFTER MIDNIGHT. TUESDAY AND TUESDAY NIGHT, NORTHWEST WIND 15 TO 20 KNOTS BECOMING NORTHEAST 10 TO 15 KNOTS IN THE AFTERNOON...THEN BECOMING SOUTHEAST 5 TO 10 KNOTS. BAYS CHOPPY TO OCCASIONALLY ROUGH DECREASING TO SLIGHTLY CHOPPY TO OCCASIONALLY CHOPPY IN THE AFTERNOON...THEN DECREASING TO SMOOTH. 2) Tides High Tide predicted for 2100 tonight (March 2, 2008) Low Tide predicted for 0900 tomorrow morning (March 3, 2008) Warning: strong wind events can over-ride the astronomical tidal predictions of high and low tide. 3) Verbal Trajectory The strength of the forecast winds make the winds the primary driver in this scenario. In the event of an oil release, the Southeasterly winds would drive the oil towards the islands and seagrass beds of Redfish Bay in the vicinity of Dagger Island and Dagger Point. As the winds move to Southwesterly (Tuesday morning) the threat would move easterly towards Ransom Point. As the winds continue changing in a clockwise manner to the Northwest (Monday evening), the threat migrates to resources south of the grounding site such as Mustang and Pelican Island. 4) Resources at Risk There are numerous resources at risk (RARs) in this area with the threat enhanced by the shallowness of the waters. The RARs include many endangered bird species that feed in these shallow waters, seagrass beds and along the shores of the numerous small islands. Also, rookeries on the islands and nursery areas in the seagrass beds are at risk. At this time of year, there are many birds present throughout this area. In the event of a spill, responders should closely coordinate their activities with wildlife specialists from Texas Parks and Wildlife Dept. and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife to ensure a minimal impact to the bird populations. Buzz Martin, Ph.D. State Scientific Support Coordinator Oil Spill Prevention & Response Texas General Land Office [SEP] Resources at Risk (Provided by Dr. Buzz Martin, TGLO) There are numerous Resources at Risk (RARs) in this area with the threat enhanced by the shallowness of the waters. The ESI Atlas identifies many endangered bird and marine species that feed in these shallow waters, seagrass beds, and along the shores of the numerous small islands. There are bird rookeries on the islands and nursery areas within the seagrass beds at risk. At this time of year, there are many birds present throughout this area. In the event of a spill, responders should closely coordinate their activities with wildlife specialists from Texas Parks and Wildlife Dept. and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife to ensure a minimal impact to the bird populations. [SEP] The NOAA SSC was just notified that the vessel has been refloated without the loss of oil. TGLO reported the vessel was off and headed outbound at 5:35 local time. A TGLO response vessel and crew will follow along up to Port Aransas to ensure vessel is not losing oil. This report will serve as the final ResponseLink entry.
USCG Sector Honolulu called the NOAA SSC Saturday evening (23Feb08) at 1730 to report a mystery sheen off Barbers Point, Hawaii. Reports of oil odor had first been received at approximately 0130. A USCG overflight reported observing a sheen approximately 100 feet wide stretching from Barbers point to the Kahe Power Plant. USCG observers on-scene reported the oil appeared to be thick diesel.  NOAA trajectory support was requested. [SEP] Conclusion: Oil spilled in Barbers Point Harbor early Friday evening could have exited the harbor and spread into coastal waters causing a slick that was was 2 - 3 miles long and parallel to shore on Saturday. We would expect oil that exited the harbor on Friday night and early Saturday morning to remain within about 1 nm from shore and move primarily alongshore under light variable wind conditions. We cannot determine exactly when and where the oil was spilled within the harbor. The harbor is small, the variability in the wind direction was large and the gravity spread of any spilled oil is difficult to quantify. The flood tide between 2300 Friday and 0530 Saturday would also bring oil back into the harbor and mix whatever oil remained in the harbor. Predicted tide heights from entrance to Pearl Harbor: We expect these to be similar to what Barber's Point Harbor would experience in both timing and height. Friday 1740 high tide 1.3 feet Friday 2310 low tide 0.01 feet Saturday 0531 high tide 1.6 feet Saturday 1151 low tide -01. feet Winds: Winds recorded from Kalaeloa Airport (Barbers Point) indicate that winds were 3 mph or less between 1853 HST(Friday) and 0253 HST (Saturday). Under these type of conditions, wind direction becomes highly variable. Windage on floating oil under these conditions would be negligible. Between 0353 and 0453 winds were actually from the NE at 3 mph. Wind observations from Waianae Harbor were from the NE (080 to 040) from 2049 on Friday night to 0949 on Saturday morning. The winds were 5 knots or less for this period. Analysis: The ebb tide excursion out of the harbor for the Friday night ebb is estimated to be about 300 to 500 yards. This means that oil that was spilled in the harbor near the start of the ebb could have been carried by the ebb tide several hundred yards off shore by midnight. Once the oil gets outside of the immediate vicinity of the entrance, it would be subject to coastal currents which would move the oil alongshore. Tidal currents alone could move the oil about 2 miles in about 6 hours. Winds were light and variable. This means that the oil spilled in the harbor would cover a significant portion of the small harbor due to gravity spreading and the variable winds. By about 0530 Saturday, the subsequent flood tide would probably have brought some oil back into the harbor and also into Ko Olina marina. Note the winds obs at 0353 and 0453 Saturday morning were FROM the NE at 3 mph. This would help to keep some oil offshore and moving along the coast. We would expect more oil to exit the harbor on the ebb that occurred on Saturday morning between 0531 and 1151 with winds being variable in direction until about noon. ??? ??? [SEP] Date; Feb. 23, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Ruth Yender FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery Spill between Barber's Point and Kahe Power Plant _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A mystery slick reported to be 3 miles by 100 feet between Barber's Point and the "power plant." We assume the power plant to be Kahe Power Plant about 4 miles west of Barber's Point. People have reported smelling oil around the Ko Olina area. No oil has been reported on the beach. Fisherman last night reported seeing oil in the water. No source has been identified. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Winds and Sea State Observations: Friday (2/22) afternoon: Light winds at less than 10 knots from the SE to S Friday night: Light winds at less than 10 knots from the NE all night east of Barber's Point Calm winds west of Barber's Point. Saturday(2/3): Light winds at less than 8 knots from the SE Forecast: Saturday night: SSW winds between 5 and 10 knots till 0200. After 0200 winds expected to increase to 10 - 15 knots from the SW Sunday: Winds from the SW at 10 - 15 knots Sunday night: A frontal passage Sunday will bring winds from the W Monday: N winds by dawn becoming N- NE during the day Tuesday : Light winds from the E A long period swell of about 3 feet is expected tonight and tomorrow which should generate some near shore surf. 2) Trajectory Analysis With the winds becoming onshore tonight and picking up after 0200, we would expect any oil within 3 nm of shore to beach overnight. The reported oil could come ashore between Ma-ili Pt and Barber's Point with the most probable area between Nanakuli and Barber's Point Harbor. 3) Oil Fate The quantity and type of oil is unknown. It is suspected that the oil may be diesel. If this is the case, most of the oil may not persist the near shore surf zone to create a noticeable beach impact. However, people in the water or near the surf zone may smell oil. If diesel does impact the beach, beach staining may occur. If the oil is heavier and more persistent, tarballs may result. [SEP] Oil Budget table (ADIOS) [SEP] http://www.uscghawaii.com/go/site/800/ [SEP] USCG Sector Honolulu called the NOAA SSC Saturday evening to report a mystery sheen off Barbers Point, Hawaii. Reports of oil odor were received at 0130. A dark sheen reported to be 100 feet wide stretching from Barbers point to the Kahe Power Plan was observed during daylight hours. USCG observers on-scene reported the oil appeared to be thick diesel. NOAA trajectory support was requested. [SEP] http://www.uscghawaii.com/go/site/800/ [SEP] During overflights conducted today no sheen was observed except in the Barbers Point Deep Draft Harbor. Shoreline survey ("SCAT") teams did not find any shoreline oiling. All beach areas closed yesterday were reopened today. Cleanup operations in the Barbers Point Harbor continued. The release is suspected to have occurred some time late Friday night February 22 or early the morning of February 23 during a diesel transfer in the Barbers Point Harbor. The cause of therelease remains under investigation. NOAA provided an oil trajectory hindcast analysis to assist in the investigation. [SEP] Chart of spill area [SEP] From Barber's Point. Note onshore winds increased overnight.
On 21Feb08 at 1030, the SSC was notified by the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary of a 38ft. private sailing vessel adrift 1.5 miles off the central California coast near Lopez Point.  The skipper called a may day and was airlifted off the vessel by the USCG.  The vessel is adrift with torn sails and no anchor. [SEP] S/V SADI, CENTRAL COAST, CA 1430 PST February 21, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (2/21): 1755 PST Sunrise (2/22): 0651 PST Sunset (2/22): 1756 PST 36 Hour Forecast and extended Winds: Thursday: S-SE winds 18-22 knots with gust to 30 knots. Thursday night: S winds 20-25 knots becoming W at 5-15 knots after midnight. Friday: W winds at 10-15 knots. Saturday: S-SE winds at 30-35 knots. Sunday: W winds 15-25 knots. Waves (combined seas): Thursday: W swell at 6-8 feet. Friday: NW swell at 10-12 feet. Saturday: NW swell at 14-16 feet. Sunday: W swell at 18-21 feet Precipitation: Thursday: chance of showers. Friday: showers. Saturday: chance of rain. Sunday: showers likely. [SEP] Selected portions of siituation updates provided by Scott Kathey (MBNMS) on 22FEB2008: The 38-ft S/V SADIE (CF8587KY) went adrift on February 21 after its sails were damaged in heavy weather and the engine malfunctioned. Coast Guard Sector San Francisco mounted a vigorous rescue response by air and sea units and lifted the two POB from the vessel, leaving the vessel adrift without a crew. A Coast Guard helicopter fixed the position of the vessel approximately 1/2 mile offshore of Grimes Point at first light on February 22, and Vessel Assist, a contract towing service, deployed to take the vessel in tow. The California Fish & Game P/B SWORDFISH arrived on scene and monitored the status of the SADIE, which was held in place by a parted anchor chain that had snagged on the seafloor. Before Vessel Assist could arrive, the sea forced the anchor chain loose, and the SADIE drifted into the shoreline, grounding upright, high on rocks, at the base of a steep 600-ft coastal bluff. The vessel went aground 1/3 mile south of Grimes Point on the Big Sur Coast (36deg 12.15'N, 121deg 43.83'W) at approximately 1130 hours (PST), Friday, February 22, 2008. Seas on scene were reported at 8 - 10 feet with overcast skies and intermittent rain squalls. A salvage technician swam ashore and inspected the vessel, reporting that the hull had sustained several punctures and was unfit for re- floating. Vessel Assist left the scene. The wreck site is accessible by foot, but not by vehicle. A strong storm front is expected to move through the area over the next 24 hours and will likely destroy the vessel, releasing the 20-30 gallons of diesel from the vessel's fuel tank. Coast Guard Sector San Francisco has been notified of the grounding and potential spill. Grounding reports have been filed with the NRC (863126 and 863015) and the California Office of Emergency Services Warning Center (report #08-1485). The vessel owner does not have insurance on the boat or available funds to remove the fuel or vessel from the wreck site. The Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary has queried the Coast Guard regarding possible action by the Federal On Scene Coordinator Representative to remove fuel from the vessel. At 1650 hours today (22FEB2008) that an Incident Management Team is deploying to Monterey this evening. They will meet up with the vessel owner tomorrow (Feb 23) and inspect the wreck site to determine if fuel can be removed from the SADIE in a safe manner. Weather conditions are expected to worsen tonight, and rains could make access down the foot trails of the steep 600-ft slope untenable. The FOSCR will determine next steps following a survey of the area. [SEP] TIME: 1430 PST Thursday, February 21, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Drifting Sailboat off Pt. Lopez, CA For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at the trajectory of a drifting sailboat off Pt. Lopez, CA.. These estimates are based on the following information: The USCG removed the operator of a 38 ft sailing vessel at 1210 today, at location 36??0.9'N, 121??35.9'W, about 1-1/2 miles off Pt Lopez, CA. The vessel is currently adrift, with sails up but torn. The USCG reported it was drifting to the NW, and they placed a locater beacon on the vessel. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WINDS: Thursday: S-SE winds 18-22 knots with gust to 30 knots. Thursday night: S winds 20-25 knots becoming W at 5-15 knots after midnight. Friday: W winds at 10-15 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: The vessel's drift will be governed by the winds and coastal currents. Examination of the HF radar currents generated by the California Ocean Observing System indicate that there is a small upcoast current of about 0.1knots in that location at this time. With these small currents, the movement will be dominated by the winds. The observations from this afternoon, and the forecast until about midnight tonight, indicate South Southeast winds, which will tend to move the vessel parallel to the coast. It is hard to know how fast it will move without more detail about the condition of the vessel. However, as the orientation of the coastline shifts, it is possible that the vessel could be beached somewhere South of Pt. Sur before midnight. It is hard to know how fast it will move without more detail about the condition of the vessel. After midnight, the wind is expected to shift to be stronger and from the West, which will move the vessel toward shore, probably beaching it within a few hours of the wind shift. We expect the vessel to be beached by early Friday morning, somewhere within ten miles of so of pt. Sur. A more accurate estimate may be able to be produced if we can get data from the locater beacon on board the vessel.
On Feb. 17, 2008, the F/Vl Westward, an 82 ft wooden hulled fish tender built in 1943, grounded in the vicinity of Point Ildefonso on the SW side of Prince of Wales Island, 7 miles west of Klawock and 10 miles NW of Craig, discharging an unknown amount of diesel. At 6:30 a.m. a containment boom was set around the vessel by the Craig Harbormaster response boat (Josie J) to mitigate further discharge of oil.  A CG  helo conducted an overflight of the stricken vessel at approximately 8:50 a.m.and reported a 2.5 nautical mile long sheen coming off the vessel.   The helo crew also reported the containment boom transported to the scene had been deployed.   Meanwhile, the CG contracted with SEAPRO for site assessment and the SEAPRO oil spill response vessel M/V Rudyard Bay departed Ketchikan at 7:30 a.m.  but did not arrive on-scene until night fall of that day.   By early afternoon on Feb. 17, the owner of the vessel reported all the vents on the vessel's oil tanks were successfully plugged during the afternoon low tide.  A second CG overflight conducted during the morning of Feb. 18 reported only sheen on the water.   Being a Sunday followed by a holiday, the CG was unable to roust any potential salvors and/or divers who could sound the fuel tanks, although the CG is currently working to develop salvage and lightering plans.   The capacity of the vessel is 4000 gallons of diesel in four tanks, 150 gallons of lube oil and 150 gallons of hydraulic oil; however, at this time the amount of fuel remaining in the tanks is unknown.    No sensitive resources were identified by the CG within 45 miles of the grounding site.  Salvor and marine surveyor finally hired to deal with the situation.   In the interim the M/V Rudyard Bay had pumped out over 4000 gals of diesel, and the marine surveyor reported no visible signs of oil in the engine room and some residual bilge slop oil in the forward compartment.   Attention is now directed at removing and disposing the 130 tons of bait herring that was on board the vessel. [SEP] An aerial photo and location chart of the grounded F/V Westward from ADEC [SEP] MER - FISHING VESSEL WESTWARD/GROUNDING/DISCHARGE OF OIL - POINT ILDEFONSO, PRINCE OF WALES ISLAND IC: SECTOR JUNEAU MISLE: 392821 WEATHER: NSTR SITUATION: UPDATE: 201600V All fuel that can be removed from the vessel has been removed and there is no further threat of pollution. Owner's Rep is working with Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation and Alaska Department of Fish and Game to remove and properly dispose of the remaining 120 tons of Bait Herring. Alaska Department of Natural Resources has required vessel to be completely removed. USCG Federal On Scene Coordinator's Rep is no longer on scene and has returned to MSD Ketchikan. Captain of the Port will review and approve Salvage Plan when it is submitted. More information contained in POLREP FOUR AND FINAL, DTG 202357Z February 08. Investigation pends. CASE PENDS. [SEP] Tidal height information; Feb. 17-20 [SEP] IC: SECTOR JUNEAU UNITS: MSD KETCHIKAN, AIR STATION SITKA WEATHER: Visibility N/A, Sea State Calm, Ceiling N/A, Air N/A, Sea N/A, Wind <20 181745V February 08: The Fishing Vessel ( Fishing Vessel ) Westward, an 82FT wooden hulled vessel built in 1943, grounded in the vicinity of Point Ildefonso on the south west side of Prince of Wales Island at approximately 170147V February 08 discharging an unknown amount of diesel fuel. Vessel contained between 3500 to 5500 gallons of diesel with 150 gallons of lube oil and 150 gallons of hydraulic oil. Vessel also contained approximately 130 tons of Herring. Containment boom has been deployed around the vessel and the vents have been plugged. Owner is unable to conduct soundings to verify amount of oil still aboard due to physical limitations in tank piping. Initial damage assessments at low tide revealed at least two holes visible in the bow section from shore. One hole is at least two feet by four feet and the other is at least three feet by four feet. Ocean bottom is mostly boulders in various sizes from six inches up to two or more feet. At high tide the vessel is almost completely under water. Anticipate weather and wave action to continue working the vessel and causing further damage as weather increases tonight to gale force warnings in the vicinity. Salvage operations have been significantly hampered by lack of any available professional Salvors in the area. Southeast Alaska Petroleum Resource Organization, a Co-op has been working with the Sector to at least lighter the vessel. Today's Air Station Sitka overflight still reported sheen in the immediate vicinity of the vessel. Oil spill recovery vessel Rudyard Bay recovered approximately 2000 gallons of diesel from the forward starboard fuel tank. Oil spill liability trust fund is opened for $100,000. Pictures are attached to the Marine Information for Safety and Law Enforcement (MISLE) case. More information contained in POLREP Two, date time Group 190415Z February 08. Investigation pends. Christopher Williammee, LT Chief, Incident Management Division USCG Sector Juneau Voice: (907) 463-2430 Fax: (907) 463-2485 mailto:Christopher.J.Williammee@uscg.mil [SEP] MER - FISHING VESSEL WESTWARD/GROUNDING/DISCHARGE OF OIL - POINT ILDEFONSO, PRINCE OF WALES ISLAND IC: SECTOR JUNEAU MISLE: 392821 WEATHER: NSTR SITUATION: 221333V February 08: 45 Tons of Herring have been removed from the vessel. Owner of vessel along with the Mayor of Craig worked with EPA and received an approval for immediate ocean dumping of any uncontaminated herring outside of three nm, vice any further landfill dumping. The SEAPRO 40" Ro-Boom has replaced the ADEC 20" containment boom around the Westward. The ADEC boom is being moved to provide additional protection of 11 Mile Creek. The marine surveyor reported no visible signs of oil in the engine room and some residual amounts of oil with the characteristics of bilge slop in the forward compartment. Sorbent materials will be placed in the compartment as tide allows. MSD Ketchikan FOSC(R) will return to Ketchikan on 23 February 08. MSD rep will return to Craig after Herring removed and salvage operations begin. MISLE No. 392821. CASE PENDS.
At 0730 hrs on 16 February 2008, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by USCG Marine Safety Unit Galveston of an allision between a vessel and oil and gas production rig in the GOM near the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary (FGBNMS).  The vessel, the GRADY FAGAN, was damaged.  A 2-inch gash was reported in the STDB day tank and there was loss of an unknown quantity of marine diesel fuel. [SEP] The Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary (FGBNMS) is one of 14 federally designated underwater areas protected by NOAA's National Marine Sanctuary Program. Located 70 to 115 miles off the coasts of Texas and Louisiana, these underwater communities rise from the depths of the Gulf of Mexico atop underwater mountains called salt domes. The sanctuary actually protects three separate areas: East Flower Garden Bank, West Flower Garden Bank and Stetson Bank. These banks are separated from each other by miles of open ocean. The FGBMNS encompasses a variety of habitat types, including the northernmost coral reefs in the continental United States. The marine community built around the FGBMNS is very rich with about 23 species of corals, over 250 reef invertebrate species, 175 plus fish species, and 80 plus species of marine algae. For additional information on the FGBNMS, please visit the following web site: http://flowergarden.noaa.gov/ [SEP] Photograph from a 2003 Dive on the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary (photo credit, Sarah Bernhardt, NOAA National Marine Sanctuaries Program). These few photographs are provided to provide the viewer a sense of the beauty and species richness of the FGBMNS. For additional information, visit the following web site: http://flowergarden.noaa.gov/ [SEP] Photograph from a 2003 Dive on the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary (photo credit, James Wiseman and the NOAA National Marine Sanctuaries Program). This photograph shows the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator observing the multi-colored sponges and coral that give the Flower Gardens its name. [SEP] At 0730 hrs on 16 February 2008, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by USCG Marine Safety Unit Galveston of an allision between a vessel and oil and gas production rig in the GOM near the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary (FGBNMS). The vessel, the GRADY FAGAN, was damaged. A 2-inch gash was reported in the STDB day tank and there was loss of an unknown quantity of marine diesel fuel. The GRADY FAGAN is a 193-foot Offshore Supply Vessel (OSV) reported to be carrying 9000 gallons of diesel in the STBD tank. The rig was reported as the Ocean Star The SSC participated in a conference call with the USCG and the ship's master. NOAA was asked to provide a trajectory analysis (see previous hotline reports). The trajectory analysis suggests that the risk to the FGBNMS was low: even is a relatively large percentage of the diesel was lost, it would not persist given the current sea conditions. Dilution of any naturally dispersed oil was expected to be rapid. To the credit of the USCG, they were very aware of the sensitivity of the FGBNMS and wanted to insure that all precautions were taken. The MSRC Texas Responder was placed on standby and a USCG Falcon jet was launched to assess the situation. The SSC notified the NMS Office so that they were aware of the situation. A map was created to relate the approximate position of the allision and track of the GRADY FAGAN. The overflight the same morning reported that there was very little sheen, or to quote the report, "not much of anything" observed. There appears to be no risk to the FGBNMS. This entry will serve as the final report for any offshore issues related to the GRADY FAGAN. The USCG remains concerned as to the safety of the vessel and any additional pollution discharge as it head into port for inspection and repair. The crew had initiated transfer of the residual fuel in the damaged STBD tank to another tank on board to mitigate release. Should the situation change, additional updates will be provided. [SEP] The map provided provides the approximate position of the allision and the general reported track of the vessel after the incident. [SEP] Attached is the summary table output of the ADIOS2 NOAA Weathering Model. [SEP] Photograph from a 2003 Dive on the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary (photo credit, Sarah Bernhardt, NOAA National Marine Sanctuaries Program). [SEP] To support these predictions, the NOAA ADIOS2 Oil Weather model was run at a wind speed less than observed and forecasted to be conservative. A relatively high rate of diesel release was also factored into the analysis (again, to be conservative, or on the safe side, with respect to risk). The results are provided on the next page. In reality, a higher percentage would probably be dispersed with higher wind speeds. This screen save of the oil budget is provided characterize the probable fate of the spilled diesel fuel. It is only a model prediction, not a true mass balance. The volume of diesel released remains unknown. [SEP] Trajectory Analysis: OSV GRADY FAGAN Incident Prepared by: Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator Situation The Offshore Supply Vessel, or OSV, GRADY FAGAN collided with the Ocean Star Rig sometime after 0400 hrs on 16 Feb. 2008. The Rig has reported no damage. The GRADY FAGAN has reported a 2-inch gash in a day tank. An unknown volume of diesel fuel has been released. The crew has started to transfer fuel oil to another tank. The reported position of the initial incident was 27?? 18' 35.8" N Lat. 093?? 34' 08.7" W Long. This position placed the accident more than 20 miles SSE of the West Flower Garden Bank. The OSV moved to the NW, and at 0640 hrs was located at approximately 27?? 35' N Lat. 093?? 42' W. Long. This position is closer to the Flower Garden Banks. The OSV then proceeded to the W at a heading of 290 degrees and a speed of 5 kts. It is unknown how much diesel was lost and if the vessel is still leaking fuel oil. USCG MSU Galveston has requested a trajectory analysis based on what information is known. Trajectory and Diesel Fate Analysis Weather. The on-scene weather current information from TABS Buoy N last reported at 0130 hrs that the winds were 14 kts from the SSE. After 0130 hrs, there have been no updates. Adjacent to the Flower Gardens is a Met Station at the Mariner Energy Platform. This station has been reporting winds at 14 to 19 kts from the SE and SSE throughout the morning hours. The NOAA Marine Forecast suggests that winds as high as 20 to 25 kts are possible through the day and rough seas. Expected Trajectory. Any spilled diesel from the vessel would be carried in a northerly direction by relatively strong winds and a relatively weak ocean current. Given the observed and reported sea conditions, any spilled diesel fuel is not expected to persist as a surface slick for more than a few hours. Evaporation and natural dispersion would rapidly transport most of the spilled diesel into the air and into the water column. Dilution rates of the naturally dispersed diesel fuel are expected to be very high given the conditions on-scene. While the vessel positions place the diesel threat near the West and East Flower Garden Banks, is doubtful that the any cohesive sheen will make it to the banks themselves. If a large amount of diesel was lost, some sheen may cross into Flower Garden National Marine Sanctuary boundary, but would not persist.
The SSC received notification from USCG Sector Baltimore at 0900 today that at approximatley 0600 hours the tank barge, Double Skin #19, being towed by the tug, Gold Coast, went aground off of Ragged Point in the Nanticote River, Maryland. Grounding believed to be a result of adverse weather conditions. Vessel carrying 420,000 gallons of No. 6 oil. No pollution reported.  USCG monitoring situation and enroute to grounding site. Miller Marine providing salvage support. Plan is to attempt to refloat vessel at next high tide. [SEP] A map of potential impact areas based on the old Galt methods. [SEP] Date; Feb. 13, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Frank Csulak FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded Barge in Nanticoke River FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: At approximately 0600 hours the tank barge, Double Skin #19 went aground off of Ragged Point in the Nanticote River, Maryland. Grounding believed to be a result of adverse weather conditions. Vessel carrying 10,000 bbls of No. 6 oil. No pollution reported. Plan is to attempt to refloat vessel at next high tide. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Wednesday: SE winds at 10-25 knots increasing to 15-20 knots. Wednesday night: NW winds 15-20 knots with gust to 25 knots. Thursday: NW winds 15-20 knots. Thursday night: S winds 5-10 knots. Friday: S winds 10 knots. Saturday: N winds 15-20 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis Tidal excursions in the area are about 4 - 5 nautical miles in either direction. If the oil should spill today under SE wind conditions: On a flood tide, oil could reach Long with most of the shoreline impact being on the West side of the Nanticoke River. On an ebb tide, most of the oil would remain north of Sandy I. with shoreline impacts occurring on the West side of the River. If the oil should spill tonight or Thursday under NW wind conditions: On the flood tide oil will go as far as Wetipquin Creek on the East side of the river with impacts occurring along the East side of the River. On an ebb tide oil will go as far as Nanticoke Pt with impacts occurring along the East side of the River. With the NW wind on Thursday, some oil could get into Tangier Sound, depending upon when and how the oil was leaked. However, with the subsequent S winds on Friday, we would expect most of the oil to remain in the Nanticoke River with some oil possible getting into Wicomico River and Fishing Bay on Friday. 3) Oil Fate See attached ADIOS 2 table. We expect about 90% of the oil to persist for at least 5 days. No siginificant evaporation of dispersion expected from the No. 6 oil. [SEP] DOUBLE SKIN #19, RAGGED POINT, MD 1200 EST February 13, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (2/13): 1741 EST Sunrise (2/14): 0700 EST Sunset (2/14): 1742 EST SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY IN EFFECT THROUGH THURSDAY MORNING 36 Hour Forecast and extended Winds: Wednesday: SE winds at 10-25 knots increasing to 15-20 knots. Wednesday night: NW winds 15-20 knots with gust to 25 knots. Thursday: NW winds 15-20 knots. Thursday night: S winds 5-10 knots. Friday: S winds 10 knots. Saturday: N winds 15-20 knots. Waves (combined seas): Wednesday: 2-3 feet increasing to 3-4 feet. Thursday: 2-3 feet. Friday: 1-2 feet. Saturday: 1-3 feet. Precipitation: Wednesday: light rain with a chance of snow showers tonight. Thursday: no precipitation is expected. Friday: chance of showers. Saturday: no precipitation is expected. [SEP] There have been two unsuccessful attempts made to refloat the barge. This morning arrangments are being made by the vessel's owner to lighter the oil from the barge in order to refloat it. USCG from Sector Baltimore and Station Crisfield and Maryland Dept. of the Environment are on-scene. Measurements of the barge's holding tanks indicate that no oil has been released from the barge. Miller Marine on-scene and boom has been pre- staged nearby. [SEP] Tidal Currents at Roaring Point, WSW of Nanticoke River, TANGIER SOUND Station No. 5801 Meter Depth: 18 feet Latitude: 38?? 15.80' N Longitude: 75?? 55.40' W Maximum Flood Direction: 356?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 181?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood +03:55 Flood +03:56 Minimum Before Ebb +04:46 Ebb +03:41 Flood Speed Ratio: 1.10 Ebb Speed Ratio: 0.70 Based on CHESAPEAKE BAY ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Wed Feb 13, 2008 to Fri Feb 15, 2008 (3 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 02/13/2008 01:21 +0.0 Min Before Flood Wed 04:06 +1.1 Max Flood 08:35 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 11:08 -0.8 Max Ebb 14:39 +0.0 Min Before Flood 16:43 +0.6 Max Flood 19:57 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 23:01 -0.8 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 02/14/2008 02:20 +0.0 Min Before Flood Thu 05:02 +1.0 Max Flood 09:48 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 12:16 -0.8 Max Ebb 15:53 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:47 +0.5 Max Flood 21:09 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 02/15/2008 00:04 -0.8 Max Ebb Fri 03:28 +0.0 Min Before Flood 06:07 +0.9 Max Flood 11:02 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 13:32 -0.8 Max Ebb 17:04 +0.0 Min Before Flood 19:08 +0.4 Max Flood 22:34 +0.0 Min Before Ebb [SEP] At approximatley 1930 hours on 2/14/08, that after lightering operations, the grounded barge in Nanticoke River was refloated without any incident. No pollution or damage to barge. USCG investigating cause of grounding. No further NOAA assistance requested. Case closed. [SEP] Tidal Heights at Bishops Head, Hooper Strait, Chesapeake Bay, Eastern Shore, MARYLAND Station No. 1977 Latitude: 38?? 13.20' N Longitude: 76?? 2.30' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water +05:32 Low Water +06:04 High water height difference: (*0.70+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.08+0.0) Based on CHESAPEAKE BAY BRIDGE TUNNEL (calculated from constituent data) From Wed Feb 13, 2008 to Fri Feb 15, 2008 (3 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Wed Feb 13, 2008; 05:54 am; 1.9ft Lowest Tide - Thu Feb 14, 2008; 12:55 am; -0.2ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 02/13/2008 05:54 +1.9 High Wed 12:50 +0.0 Low 18:09 +1.5 High ------------------------------------------------------- 02/14/2008 00:55 -0.2 Low Thu 06:55 +1.9 High 13:58 +0.2 Low 19:12 +1.4 High ------------------------------------------------------- 02/15/2008 02:00 -0.1 Low Fri 08:06 +1.8 High 15:12 +0.2 Low 20:27 +1.4 High [SEP] Not sure about exact lat - long location
The roll-on, roll-off container vessel Centaurus Leader ran aground 13Feb2008 while inbound to Brunswick, GA.  The position is at buoys 26 and 27, Lat 31-06.69; Long 081-28.18.  The vessel is grounded on mud bottom and reports damage to two tanks; #1 Stbd used for ballast and #1 Stbd/center which has 1320 gallons of Heavy Fuel Oil.  No release is reported at this time. [SEP] M/V CENTAURUS LEADER, BRUNSWICK, GA 0330 EST February 17, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunrise (2/17): 0705 EST Sunset (2/17): 1815 EST Sunrise (2/18): 0704 EST Sunset (2/18): 1815 EST 36 Hour Forecast and extended Winds: Sunday: S winds 10-15 knots increasing to 15-20 knots late in the day. Monday: SW winds 15-20 knots. Tuesday: NW winds 15-20 knots. Wednesday: NW winds 5-10 knots. Waves (combined seas): Sunday: seas 3-5 feet, inland waters moderate chop. Monday: seas 3-5 feet, inland waters moderate chop. Tuesday: seas 2-3 feet, inland waters moderate chop. Wednesday: seas 2 feet or less, inland water smooth. Precipitation: Sunday: isolated of showers and thunderstorms. Monday: scattered of showers and thunderstorms Tuesday: no precipitation is expected. Wednesday: no precipitation is expected. [SEP] This was initially placed in the wrong Hotline case file. It has been added (moved) only for documentation. [SEP] Spill map [SEP] USCG updated initial information at 0945 as follows: Fuel is in Stbd tank and is 5060 cubic meters of HFO. The center tank is empty. Vessel floated free as tide rose and is being towed to a nearby area for hull inspection. OOPS is on scene for response if needed. No pollution is reported as of now. CG is having vessel fully boomed and requiring a plan for transfer of all fuel from the damaged tank. CG is requesting NOAA to provide trajectory, weather and oil fate. [SEP] Tidal currents [SEP] M/V CENTAURUS LEADER, BRUNSWICK, GA 1200 EST February 15, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (2/15): 1812 EST Sunrise (2/16): 0704 EST Sunset (2/16): 1814 EST 36 Hour Forecast and extended Winds: Friday: N winds 5-10 knots becoming E at 5-10 knots in the afternoon. Saturday: N winds 5-10 knots becoming NE at 5-10 knots. Saturday night: E winds 5-10 knots. Sunday: SE winds 10-15 knots. Monday: W winds 15-20 knots. Waves (combined seas): Friday: inland water smooth. Saturday: inland waters light chop. Sunday: inland waters moderate chop. Monday: inland waters choppy. Precipitation: Friday: no precipitation is forecast. Saturday: no precipitation is forecast. Sunday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Monday: chance of showers and thunderstorms [SEP] Lightering site [SEP] Date: Feb. 13, 2008 1230 AST update To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio / USCG Kevin P Lynn FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded vessel, Brunswick, Ga. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: "Update - we are dealing with HFO 380. Current quantity is 560 cu meters or roughly 147900 gallons oil. Still awaiting API gravity of HFO 380 (unless you have more info on this type of product) Still no report of spill at this time." If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Wind Forecast W at 15 - 20 knots today becoming NW tonight and tomorrow. Thursday night 5 - 10 knot winds from the NE. 2) Trajectory Analysis Should the oil spill today: With the W winds we would expect oiling along the W side of Blythe Island as far as the Hi way 303 bridge on a flood tide. On the ebb oil could impact shoreline from the S side of Andrews I. to Brunswick Point. Scattered tarballs could get as far as Jekyll I. Should the oil spill tonight or tomorrow: On a flood tide oil oil can impact the south side of the Turtle River up to the Hi way 303 bridge. On an ebb tide shoreline impacts could extend along the south side of the Turtle and Brunswick River from the vessel location to the ICW on Jekyll Island. With about 150,000 gallons spilled we would expect heavily coated shoreline within the harbor, especially within 2 -3 miles of the vessel. On the second flood after the spill you can expect oil to enter the various rivers from oil that refloated off the shoreline and from whatever remained in the channel. On the second flood: Expect oil into the Turtle River up to the 303 bridge Into the East River Into the tributaries along the Brunswick River. On the second ebb after the spill: Expect a visible slick to be existing Simon Sound. Outer coast: With the wind expected to be from the NW the oil would move down coast(to the south) with the currents and remain offshore. We would not expect oil to come ashore until the winds become onshore (from NE) Thursday night. Impacts along the outer coast would extend about 10 - 15 miles south of Simon Sound and be in the form of scattered tarballs most of which would come ashore on Friday. 3) Oil Fate Oil Name = IFO 300 API = 11.9 Pour Point = 21 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = 1 ft Water Temperature = 75 deg F Time of Initial Release = February 13, 1000 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 148,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining  Spill gal percent percent percent  1 148,000 - 0 - 0 - 100  2 148,000 1 0 99  4 148,000 - 2 - 0 - 98  8 148,000 5 0 95  12 148,000 - 8 - 0 - 92  16 148,000 10 0 90  20 148,000 - 11 - 0 - 89  24 148,000 12 0 88  30 148,000 - 13 - 0 - 87  36 148,000 14 0 86  42 148,000 - 15 - 0 - 85  48 148,000 16 0 84  54 148,000 - 16 - 0 - 84  60 148,000 17 0 83  66 148,000 - 17 - 0 - 83  72 148,000 17 0 83  78 148,000 - 18 - 0 - 82  84 148,000 18 0 82  90 148,000 - 18 - 0 - 82  96 148,000 18 0 82  102 148,000 - 18 - 0 - 82  108 148,000 19 0 81  114 148,000 - 19 - 0 - 81  120 148,000 19 0 81 [SEP] spill map 2 [SEP] Tidal Currents at Brunswick River Bridge, southeast of, ST. SIMONS SOUND Station No. 7871 Meter Depth: 13 feet Latitude: 31?? 6.90' N Longitude: 81?? 28.60' W Maximum Flood Direction: 308?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 132?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood -00:15 Flood +00:13 Minimum Before Ebb +00:26 Ebb -01:09 Flood Speed Ratio: 0.50 Ebb Speed Ratio: 0.70 Based on SAVANNAH RIVER ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Sat Feb 16, 2008 to Tue Feb 19, 2008 (4 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 02/16/2008 01:21 +1.1 Max Flood Sat 05:30 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 07:33 -1.3 Max Ebb 11:10 +0.0 Min Before Flood 14:05 +0.6 Max Flood 17:46 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 19:46 -1.2 Max Ebb 23:05 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 02/17/2008 02:27 +1.1 Max Flood Sun 06:32 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 08:32 -1.5 Max Ebb 12:08 +0.0 Min Before Flood 15:16 +0.7 Max Flood 18:49 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 20:47 -1.4 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 02/18/2008 00:05 +0.0 Min Before Flood Mon 03:30 +1.1 Max Flood 07:29 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 09:25 -1.6 Max Ebb 13:00 +0.0 Min Before Flood 16:21 +0.8 Max Flood 19:48 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 21:42 -1.5 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 02/19/2008 01:02 +0.0 Min Before Flood Tue 04:28 +1.1 Max Flood 08:19 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 10:13 -1.7 Max Ebb 13:47 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:11 +0.9 Max Flood 20:41 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 22:33 -1.6 Max Ebb [SEP] photo by USCG [SEP] Forecast for , Brunswick, Ga. 1115 EST February 13, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (2/13): 1811 EST Sunrise (2/14): 0709 EST Sunset : 1812 Synopsis: Cold front moving through the area. Conditions will improve as high pressure sets up behind front. 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Wednesday: Winds from W at 15 - 20 till about 1800 Wednesday night: Winds from WNW at 10 knots from WNW After 0300 Winds from NW at 5 - 10 knots Thursday: Winds from NW at 5 - 10 knots Thursday night: Winds from NE at 5 - 10 knots Waves (combined seas): Wednesday: choppy conditions in the harbor Wednesday night: Calm in the harbor Thursday: Calm in the harbor Precipitation: Possible showers Wednesday. Clear conditions from Wednesday night till Saturday Extended Outlook: After today, Clear and moderate 5 - 10 knot winds through Sunday.
On 2/11/08, NOAA ERD was notified that the 940-foot LNG Tanker Catalunya Spirit was disabled and adrift offshore of Cape Cod, MA. Vessel has 2400 MT bunker, 110 MT diesel, and 137,808 cubic meters of LNG. The tanker is drifting offshore and not in immediate peril, and tugs and a technician are enroute. At current drift rate and course, the USCG estimates the vessel will encounter Cultivator Shoals at Georges Bank 1000 Tuesday. NOAA ERD was requested to provide trajectory for the bunker fuel onboard and more detailed bathymetry for the shoal. [SEP] The attached graphic shows that the surveys for Cultivator Shoal are old (1958 and 1959). Bottom characteristics in a 20 nm rad. around the shoal indicate either: Sand & Gravel, Sand, Shells or Mud. The shoals and contours may have shifted but the bottom type would most likely remain as indicated. (posting for archival purposes) [SEP] LNG Catalunya Spirit, 37 NM East of Provincetown, MA 1700 EST February 12, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Mooring Location. Sunset (2/12): 1712 EST Sunrise (2/13): 0644 EST Sunset (2/13): 1714 EST SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY IN EFFECT FROM MIDNIGHT TONIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY EVENING 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tuesday night: SE winds 5-10 knots increasing to 15-20 knots late tonight. Wednesday: SE winds at 20-25 knots increasing to 30 knots by noon. Wednesday night: NE winds 15-20 knots becoming NW 20-30 knots late in the evening. After midnight N winds at 20-25 knots. Thursday: NW winds 25-30 knots becoming NW 20-25 knots late in the day. Thursday night: NW winds 15-20 knots. Friday: SW winds 10-15 knots. Waves (combined seas): Tuesday evening: 2-4 feet. Wednesday: 4-7 feet building to 6-9 feet in the afternoon hours. Thursday: 4-7 feet. Friday: 2-4 feet. Precipitation: Tuesday night: chance of rain and snow showers. Areas of fog developing. Wednesday: rain and fog developing reducing visibility to less than one mile. Thursday: sleet and rain in the morning hours. Clearing in the afternoon. Friday: chance of mixed precipitation is forecast turning to snow late in the day. [SEP] Chart showing approximate location of ship as of this afternoon. [SEP] Subject: Awareness - LNG Tank Vessel Adrift - 40 nm East Cape Cod, MA - UPDATE 4 Importance: High UNCLAS FOUO Bearing/Distance to nearest shoal: 47 NM W As of 1400R T/S CATALUNYA SPIRIT was 9 NM E of the temporary refuge/safe point, making way 310 degrees at 3.9 kts in tow with TUG FREEDOM. Vessel is presently under positive control by TUG FREEDOM. Tug IONA MCALLISTER o/s assisting as necessary. Cargo is stable and nearest shoal is W at 47NM Future plans: salvage Tug ATLANTIC SALVOR has an ETA of 1430 12FEB08. Vessel will remain under tow by Tug FREEDOM. There are six tugs available for the escort of the SUEZ BOSTON due in Wednesday morning; making the FREEDOM and LIBERTY available to remain on scene as necessary. UC has given the go-ahead for the Vessel to continue from the temporary refuge/safe point to the northern anchorage 7 NM SE of Gloucester ETA 0500 13FEB08. Environmental assets mobilized: MAINE RESPONDER on-scene, NEW JERSEY RESPONDER ETA 0900 13Feb08 and DELAWARE RESPONDER ETA 2330 13Feb08. Weather on scene: Winds are 298 WNW at 12 kts, seas/swells are 2 ft. Forecasted weather: NW winds 15 - 25 kts diminishing to 5 - 10 kts midday. Seas subsiding to 2 - 4 ft before building to 4 - 7 ft late tonight. DHS/ NOC SWO, ASWO and CG watch have been notified. UNCLAS FOUO Coast Guard Command Center Headquarters (CG-3111) [SEP] FYI, map of transit through SBNMS courtesy of Mike Thompson and AIS [SEP] LNG Catalunya Spirit, 37 NM East of Provincetown, MA 1130 EST February 12, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (2/12): 1712 EST Sunrise (2/13): 0644 EST Sunset (2/13): 1714 EST 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tuesday afternoon: NW winds at 15-20 knots diminishing to 10 knots or less in the late afternoon. Tuesday evening: SE winds 20-30 knots. Wednesday: S-SE winds at 25-30 knots. Wednesday night: SE winds 25-35 knots becoming NW 20-30 knots late in the evening. After midnight N winds at 15-25 knots. Thursday: NW winds 25-35 knots becoming NW 20-30 knots becoming NW 10-15 late in the day. Friday: SW winds 15-25 knots. Waves (combined seas): Tuesday afternoon: 3-7 feet. Tuesday evening: 3-6 feet increasing after midnight to 6-8 feet. Wednesday: 10-12 feet. Thursday: 7-11 feet. Friday: 3-6 feet. Precipitation: Tuesday: chance of rain. Tuesday night: chance of rain and snow showers. Areas of fog developing. Wednesday: rain and fog developing reducing visibility to less than one mile. Thursday: no precipitation is expected. Friday: chance of mixed precipitation is forecast. [SEP] LNG Catalunya Spirit, Provincetown, MA 1100 EST February 13, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (2/13): 1714 EST Sunrise (2/14): 0643 EST Sunset (2/14): 1715 EST SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY IN EFFECT THROUGH WEDNESDAY EVENING 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Wednesday: SE winds at 20-25 knots increasing to 25-30 knots by noon. Wednesday night: NE winds 15-20 knots becoming NW 20-30 knots late in the evening. Thursday: NW winds 20-25 knots. Thursday night: NW winds 15-20 knots becoming W at 10-15 knots after midnight. Friday: SW winds 10-15 knots. Saturday: NW winds 20-25 knots. Waves (combined seas): Wednesday: 4-7 feet building to 6-9 feet in the afternoon hours. Thursday: 6-9 feet. Friday: 4-6 feet subsiding to 2-4 feet. Saturday: 3-5 feet. Precipitation: Wednesday: rain and freezing rain are expected. Areas of fog are predicted reducing visibility to less than one mile. Thursday: rain in the morning hours. Clearing in the afternoon. Friday: chance of mixed precipitation is forecast turning to snow late in the day. Saturday: chance of freezing spray. [SEP] Catalunya Spirit, 37 NM East of Provincetown, MA 1630 EST February 11, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (2/11): 1734 EST Sunrise (2/12): 0652 EST Sunset (2/12): 1735 EST 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This evening: NW at 25-35 knots Tonight: winds NW at 20-25 knots. Tuesday: W 10-15 knots. Tuesday night: SE 20-30 knots. Wednesday: S to SW 25-35 knots. Wednesday night: N-NW 25-30 knots. Thursday: NW 20-25 knots. Waves: This evening: seas 9-11 feet. Tonight: seas 5-9 feet. Tuesday: seas 4-6 feet subsiding to 2-4 feet. Tuesday night: 2-4 feet. Wednesday: 12-14 feet. Wednesday night: 11-16 feet. Thursday: 4-5 feet, rough in protected waters. Precipitation: This evening: freezing spray. Tonight: freezing spray. Tuesday: chance of snow showers. Wednesday: chance of freezing rain. Thursday: no precipitation is expected. Temperature: Low's near 30. High near 40. [SEP] Georges Bank, east of Cape Cod, is an extensive bank with depths of less than 50 fathoms that extend over 150 miles northeastward from the offshore end of Nantucket Shoals. (117) In heavy weather the danger area is the oval-shaped top of the bank, which is about 80 miles long in a northeast-southwest direction and 50 miles in maximum width. The bottom in this area is extremely broken and irregular, with a great number of ridges and shoal spots having depths of less than 10 fathoms. Between these shoals are channels of varying widths in which depths of about 20 fathoms may be found. All of this area lies within the 30-fathom curve, and so much of it has depths of less than 20 fathoms that it may practically all be considered to lie within a generalized 20-fathom curve. (119) The bottom is mostly sand, sometimes with shell, and in places pebbles. Bottom samples obtained during surveys are described in a great many places on the charts. (120) The two principal dangers on Georges Bank are Georges Shoal and Cultivator Shoal, which are near the center of the danger area. Around these shoals the sea breaks in depths of 10 fathoms during heavy weather, and the locality should be avoided by deep-draft vessels. (123) Cultivator Shoal, near the western end of Georges Bank, is a ridge nearly 15 miles long, on which depths of 3 to 10 fathoms are found. The 3-fathom spot is near the north end of the shoal. In December 1980, a submerged obstruction was reported about 8.7 miles northwest of the 3-fathom spot in about 41??43'N., 68??23'W.; vessels engaged in bottom operations are advised to exercise caution in the area. (124) The entire area within the 20-fathom curve has an extremely broken bottom. There are numerous ridges and shoal spots on which depths dangerous to navigation, particularly in heavy weather, may be found. These shoal spots generally have steep sides, and soundings give very little or no indication of their existence. Tide rips and swirls, as well as overfalls, are common in the vicinity of these spots, but are not always visible. They show best with a smooth sea and with the current flowing in certain directions. These disturbances are not
USCG Sector Honolulu called the SSC the night of January 24 to report 1 barrel of diesel had been released by the USNS Flint 80 miles south of the Island of Oahu.  Oil fate information was requested.
Collision between Break bulk ship and dredge barge in Newark Bay. Approx location is middle of Newark Bay N 40.39'51.70" W 074.08'27.13" Collision occurred approx. 1400hrs EST. 2998 Metric Tons of IFO (Fuel oil) on board vessel and 225 Metric Tons of Diesel on board vessel. Slight sheen in water at this time extending to entrance of Arthur Kill (about 0.5 mile). Cannot verify if coming from vessel or barge Unknown if barge had any fuel storage capacity on board. [SEP] Coast Guard Repair And Recovery Operations Continue After Two Vessel Collision In Newark Bay, N.J. By newsdesk - Posted on January 29th, 2008 New York - A unified command with representatives from the Great Lakes Dredge and Dock LLC (the owner of the Dredge New York), Coast Guard Sector New York, New York Department of Environmental Conservation (NY DEC), New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJ DEP) and the vessel Orange Sun continue to monitor the repair and recovery of a damaged dredge vessel after a collision with a freight ship in Newark Bay Thursday. The Orange Sun, a 669-foot Liberian flagged vessel and the dredging vessel New York were involved in a collision resulting in the New York taking on water and leaking a small amount of hydraulic fluid. The Dredge New York was carrying approximately 3,000 gallons of hydraulic oil, 50,000 gallons of main diesel fuel and 1,000 gallons of lube oil at the time of the incident. Crews from the Great Lakes Dredge and Dock LLC deployed booming equipment around the vessel as a precaution immediately after the incident. As an additional precautionary measure, Great Lakes Dredge and Dock LLC contracted Ken's Marine to deploy boom around Shooter's Island, Newark Channel, the Elizabeth Channel and Singer Flat due to sensitive environments and wildlife in those areas. A Coast Guard Sector New York Shoreline Cleanup Assessment Team, (SCAT) conducted a survey in the vicinity of the Bayonne Bridge and Staten Island at 8 a.m. Friday and reported minimal sheen in the water. There have been no reports of impact to the waterfowl, fish or aquatic vegetation in the vicinity of the collision as a result of the incident. Coast Guard Air Station Cape Cod and Atlantic City helicopter crews conducted over flights of the collision site at 2:30 p.m. Thursday and at 10 a.m. Friday. Both over flights reported a light sheen coming from the barge as well as in the vicinity of Shooters Island, Port Newark and Port Elizabeth. A second layer of booming equipment was deployed by Kens Marine around the dredge vessel as a result of the over flights. The Randive Company, also contracted by the Great Lakes Dredge and Dock LLC, began a dive survey of the Dredge New York at 6:45 p.m. Thursday. The survey revealed four holes in the bow of the ship and a rupture in the hull that spans vertically from its keel to deck. The rupture is about 12-feet to 15-feet long and ranges from two to 12 inches in width on the port side of the ship. The dive survey also revealed that the two forward compartments, which hold the dredge vessel's spud controls, are flooded. Dive surveys will continue until the vessel has been determined safe to move. Two commercial scow barges initially helped to stabilize the vessel and keep it in place, and a heavy lift crane is now on scene to provide additional lifting support if needed. The Coast Guard Cutter Sturgeon Bay, a 140-foot vessel home ported in Bayonne, N.J., will remain in the vicinity of the damaged vessel to monitor the status of the repair and to enforce a no wake zone until the salvage operations are completed. Newark Bay was initially closed to vessel traffic but reopened Thursday at 7 p.m. "The quick initial response from all the agencies involved helped to mitigate what could have been a much more serious situation" said Lt. j.g. Kristin Conville, a Coast Guard Sector New York Incident Management Division officer. "The continued cooperation from all involved parties has allowed crews to stabilize the damaged dredge, prevent impact to the environment and move forward with recovery efforts." The Liberian flagged vessel Orange Sun, owned by Arctic Reefer Corporation in Monrovia, Liberia, and operated by Atlanship Switzerland, was outbound at the time of the incident. After the collision, the vessel was escorted to the Southern Bay Ridge Anchorage in New York Harbor. A Captain of the Port Order has been issued for the vessel requiring a specified classification society to verify that the vessel is fit for route and service as well as to provide a dive survey assessing any damage that might have been done to the vessel. "We will continue the repair efforts on a round the clock basis with our own personnel and with the help of salvage and diving contractors," said Chris Gunsten, a representative for the Great Lakes Dredge and Dock LLC. "The safety of the environment, our crews and the users of the waterway is of the utmost importance as we continue with this difficult task." Source: Coast Guard [SEP] Trajectory Map - for 25 Jan. @ 0600 [SEP] This is the same video posted earlier, but converted to mp4 format [SEP] It appears that the source of sheening is from a severed hydraulic line on the bow of the dredge barge. The bow is partially submerged at this time. USCG would still like to get a trajectory based on the vessel's capacity. [SEP] Jan 24, 2008 4:36 pm US/Eastern OJ Tanker Collides With Vessel In Newark Bay Officials Shut Down Bay Indefinitely NEWARK, N.J. (CBS) ???€? A tanker carrying orange juice collided with a dredging vessel in Newark Bay on Thursday afternoon, the Coast Guard confirmed to CBS 2, causing officials to close the surrounding portion of the bay. The accident occurred around 2 p.m. near Port Newark between the 669-foot tanker called the "Orange Sun" and the 117-foot vessel, the "New York." According to the Coast Guard, the vessel is taking on water. A large red crane attached to the ship also became partially submerged into the water and was in danger of sinking. Five of the seven people on board the "New York" were taken from the scene by another vessel as a precautionary measure. A large dent can be seen on the bow of the tanker, along with several large black scratches along the side of the ship. Hydraulic fluid leaked from one of the vessels into the water, but there doesn't appear to be any immediate toxic danger. No one was injured in the collision. http://wcbstv.com/local/vessels.collide.newark.2.637160.html [SEP] VESSEL COLLISIION, NEWARK BAY, NJ 1500 EDT January 24, 2008 Sunset (1/24): 1703 EDT Sunrise (1/25): 0712 EDT Sunset (1/25): 1704 EDT 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This afternoon: winds N at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds N at 13-21 knots. Friday: winds NW 15-20 knots Friday evening: winds W at 8-15 knots. Saturday: winds W at 6-10 knots. Waves: This afternoon: seas are forecast to be 1-2 feet Tonight: seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. Friday: seas are forecast to be 1-2 feet. Saturday: seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. Precipitation: This afternoon: chance of snow flurries. Tonight: chance of snow flurries. Friday: no precipitation expected. Saturday: chance of flurries late in the day. Temperatures: High in the low 30's. Low in the upper teens. [SEP] Accident Closes Major Shipping Channel for Hours By KEN BELSON Published: January 25, 2008 A 669-foot tank ship carrying orange juice collided with a smaller dredging ship in Newark Bay on Thursday, forcing the Coast Guard to close a waterway that leads to some of the largest shipping terminals on the East Coast for about five hours. No one was injured in the collision, but the smaller ship, the 117-foot Dredge New York, took on water and started to sink before it was stabilized. The Coast Guard found a sheen of light hydraulic fluid in the surrounding water, but investigators had not determined its source. Several Coast Guard helicopters and boats with investigators were at the site, according to Petty Officer Angelia Rorison, a spokeswoman for the Coast Guard in New York. She added that the hydraulic fluid spill did not appear serious and that no other major pollutants were found. The collision, Officer Rorison said, occurred about 1:50 p.m. near Port Newark, on the west side of a channel between Bayonne, N.J., and Newark. The freighter, Orange Sun, which was flying a Liberian flag, collided with the dredging vessel, and several hours later, the ship was escorted by tugboats to Berth 24 at Port Newark. The dredging vessel was linked to a barge and tugboat after water was removed from the ship. The dredging vessel was working on a $2.5 billion project to deepen New York Harbor and the surrounding channels to 50 feet, from 45 feet, to allow bigger container ships to dock in New York and New Jersey. The damaged vessel was owned by Great Lakes Dredge and
USCG Sector Portland notified the SSC that the F/V Anna Marie is grounded on Copalis Beach, north of Ocean Shores, WA.  The vessel is stable and in the process of being refloated.  No diesel has been released.  No support has been requested at this time. [SEP] F/V ANNA MARIE, COPALIS BEACH, WA 1500 PDT January 25, 2008 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (1/25): 1706 PDT Sunrise (1/26): 0748 PDT Sunset (1/26): 1708 PDT 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This evening: winds NE at 6-10 knots. Tonight: winds NE at 6-10 knots. Saturday morning: SE 11-14 knots. Saturday afternoon: SW 15-20 knots. Saturday night: SW 15-25 knots. Sunday: SW 15-25 knots becoming N at 15-25 late in the day. Monday: NE 10-20 knots.  Waves: Tonight: seas are expected to be 10-12 feet. Saturday morning: seas are forecast to be 9-10 feet. Saturday night: seas are expected to be 9-11 feet. Sunday: seas are predicted to be 14 feet. Monday: seas are forecast to be 15 feet beginning to subside. Precipitation: Tonight: chance of rain and/or snow showers. Saturday: chance of rain and/or snow showers. Sunday: chance of rain and/or snow showers. Monday: chance of rain and/or snow showers. Temperatures: Low's near 30. High in the low 40's. [SEP] Incident Briefing document [SEP] USCG Photo [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR F V ANNA MARIE...NOAA HAZMAT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE SEATTLE WA 918 AM PST FRI JAN 25 2008 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE IN SEATTLE. DISCUSSION...LIGHT OFFSHORE FLOW WILL PERSIST TODAY...BRINGING ONE MORE DAY OF MOSTLY SUNNY AND DRY WEATHER. SATURDAY WILL BRING RAIN AS A COLD FRONT APPROACHES.A TROUGH OF LOW PRESSURE OVER THE COASTAL WATERS WILL PERSIST SUNDAY AND MONDAY. COLD WET WEATHER WILL CONTINUE TUESDAY AS ANOTHER FRONT ARRIVES. TODAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 43. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....EAST WINDS AROUND 5 TO 7 KTS. SWELL HEIGHT........WEST SWELL 9 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........13 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........LESS THAN 1 FOOT. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.00 INCHES. TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........PARTLY CLOUDY. MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 34. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS 6 TO 10 KTS...BECOMING SOUTHEAST 5 KTS AFTER MIDNIGHT. SWELL HEIGHT........NORTHWEST SWELL 8 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........12 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........1 FOOT OR LESS. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.00 INCHES. SATURDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........CLOUDY. RAIN DEVELOPING BY AFTERNOON. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 42. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....SOUTHEAST WINDS 11 TO 14 KTS IN THE MORNING... SHIFTING TO THE SOUTHWEST 16 TO 20 KTS IN THE AFTERNOON. SWELL HEIGHT........NORTHWEST SWELL 7 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........11 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........1 FOOT EARLY IN THE MORNING...BUILDING TO 3 FEET IN THE AFTERNOON. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.24 INCHES. [SEP] Tide Heights [SEP] Current information is: 70' vessel bow stuck in sand, stern with enough water to run engines. 40,000 pound of crab (dead and dying), 2000 gallons of diesel. Steel hull intact; no fuel release. Conditions fairly calm. Location is about 300 yards south of the Copalis River, near to but outside the sanctuary. Today's attempt to free the vessel was unsuccessful; they were not able to get a tow line from another fishing boat. Fred Devine Co. has been hired for salvage and plans to mobilize tugs and helicopters tomorrow for a high tide around noon. There may be a morning meeting to review the salvage plan. The OCNMS and EPA have been consulted about discard of the dead crab, which may be necessary to lighten the vessel. OCNMS has reviewed sanctuary concerns with the Coast Guard: helicopter overflights OK for emergency response. No special natural resource concerns in this area at this time of year for wildlife disturbance. For crab disposal, better outside of sanctuary, better distributed over large area in deeper waters; do what is necessary for the salvage then control further disposal at sea. [SEP] USCG responders on scene report that salvage attempts yesterday were unsuccessful. The helicopter was unable to deliver the line to the tug before the tide went out and no pull was put on the vessel. Attempts to refloat the vessel will resume today. The vessel is not yet damaged and the crew is remaining onboard. The vessel is within sanctuary boundaries and OCNMS as well as other resource trustees have been kept apprised of the situation and salvage plans. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR F V ANNA MARIE...NOAA HAZMAT NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE SEATTLE WA 945 AM PST THU JAN 24 2008 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE IN SEATTLE. DISCUSSION...HIGH PRESSURE WILL CONTINUE EAST OF THE AREA AS A TROUGH OF LOW PRESSURE MOVES SOUTH THROUGH THE OFFSHORE WATERS. THIS WILL GIVE SOUTHEASTERLY FLOW 15 TO 20 KNOTS TODAY...BACKING TO MORE LIGHT ENE FLOW TONIGHT AND FRIDAY. NO PRECIPITATION EXPECTED. TODAY... SKY/WEATHER.........HIGH CLOUDINESS. CWR.................0. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 44. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....SOUTHEAST WINDS 12 TO 19 KTS. SWELL HEIGHT........WEST SWELL 7 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........17 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........2 FEET. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.00 INCHES. TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........HIGH CLOUDS. CWR.................0. MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 34. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....EAST WINDS 6 TO 10 KTS. SWELL HEIGHT........WEST SWELL 8 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........15 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........1 FOOT. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.00 INCHES. FRIDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY SUNNY. CWR.................0. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 44. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....EAST TO NORTHEAST WINDS AROUND 6 KTS. SWELL HEIGHT........WEST SWELL 8 FEET. SWELL PERIOD........13 SECONDS. WIND WAVE...........1 FEET. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.00 INCHES. [SEP] Vessel Location [SEP] This afternoon the F/V ANNA MARIE was successfully freed from the beach. [SEP] VESSEL FREED FROM BEACH AT COPALIS SEATTLE - A third day of salvage attempts proved fruitful late afternoon Saturday, when the Anna Marie was finally pulled free from the beach during high tide at Copalis. The boat ran aground on Wednesday morning, and previous attempts to get the vessel off the sand on Thursday and Friday were unsuccessful. It took at least two hours of pulling during high tide, but the Anna Marie is now safely offshore while the salvage crew readies the boat for a tow into port for repairs. Responders from the Washington Department of Ecology (Ecology) and Coast Guard have been on scene since Wednesday to coordinate and monitor attempts to get the vessel into deep water again. The boat had been in a precarious position, also putting at risk 1,000 gallons of diesel and another 200 gallons of other petroleum products. Ecology and Coast Guard had plans in place and equipment staged to remove fuel from the Anna Marie had today's salvage attempt not gone well. The vessels owners are now working on a tow plan, which details how and where the Anna Marie will be taken for repairs. The Coast Guard must first approve the tow plan. The salvage effort was conducted by Fred Devine Diving and Salvage. [SEP] USCG Sector Portland notified the SSC that the F/V Anna Marie is grounded on Copalis Beach, north of Ocean Shores, WA. The vessel is stable and in the process of being refloated. No diesel has been released. No support has been requested at this time.
On Saturday afternoon, 19 January 2008, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a vessel hitting a oil and gas well.  The time of the incident was approximately 0400 hrs.  The skipper of the vessel reported that he could smell oil and gas, but in the dark, could see nothing.  The reported position is just 4.5 miles SW of Breton National Wildlife Refuge and 9 miles NNE of the Delta National Wildlife Refuge.  The USCG responded in the SAR mode, but little information as to the damage of the well or possible oil release on water is available. [SEP] The attached photograph was provided by the USCG. A wellhead is visible, but no oil or gas/condensate is observed (photograph credit, USCG). [SEP] Spot Weather Forecast for Breton Sound Well 53 1600 CST, Jan 12, 2008 Sunrise/Sunset in CST: Saturday Jan 19 Sunset: 1723 CST Sunday Jan 20 Sunrise: 0651 CST Sunset: 1724 CST Monday Jan 21 Sunrise: 0613 CST Sunset: 1725 CST Tuesday Jan 22 Sunrise: 0651 CST Sunset: 1726 CST Winds: Saturday night: Winds from N at 20 - 25 knots Sunday morning: Winds from NE at 15 - 20 knots Sunday afternoon: Winds from ENE at 15 - 20 knots Sunday night: Winds from E at 15 knots Monday morning: Winds from E at 15 knots Monday night: Winds from SE at 15 knots Tuesday: Winds from S at 10 knots becoming W at 5 - 10 knots late in the afternoon Tuesday night: Winds from N at 10 knots ___________________________________ Seas: Saturday night: 5 - 6 feet Sunday morning: 3 - 4 feet Sunday night: 3- 4 feet Monday: 3 - 4 feet Tuesday: 3 - 4 feet ___________________________________ Precipitation: Saturday night: No rain expected Sunday: No rain expected Monday: No rain expected Monday night: 20% chance of rain Tuesday: 30% chance of rain ___________________________________ NWS Synopsis: SYNOPSIS...THE LOW THAT MOVED ACROSS THE NORTHERN GULF THIS MORNING IS NOW LOCATED SOUTH OF THE FLORIDA BIG BEND AREA. WINDS HAVE ALREADY BEGUN TO DROP AS THE PRESSURE GRADIENT HAS WEAKENED. SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY CONDITIONS STILL EXIST ACROSS THE GULF WATERS AND THE LAKE. THE COLD FRONT IS CURRENTLY LOCATED ALONG A LINE FROM JACKSON MISSISSIPPI TO FORT POLK LOUISIANA. IT IS EXPECTED TO SWEEP ACROSS THE GULF LATE THIS AFTERNOON AND INTO TONIGHT. HIGH PRESSURE WILL BUILD IN BEHIND THE FRONT AND WILL REMAIN IN PLACE THROUGH SUNDAY NIGHT. BY MONDAY...THE HIGH WILL BEGIN TO SLIDE TOWARD THE CAROLINAS...AS ANOTHER AREA OF LOW PRESSURE BEGINS TO DEVELOP OVER TEXAS. THE LOW IS EXPECTED TO MOVE QUICKLY NORTHEASTWARD AS THE NEXT COLD FRONT APPROACHES FROM THE WEST ON TUESDAY. THE FRONT IS EXPECTED TO STALL OVER THE NORTHERN GULF OF MEXICO TUESDAY EVENING AND REMAIN IN PLACE THROUGH WEDNESDAY. [SEP] Delta NWR supports a wide variety of wildlife species. Tens of thousands of wintering waterfowl take advantage of the rich food resources found in the delta, and large numbers of other bird species can be found on the refuge. Bird populations generally peak during the spring and fall migrations. Large numbers of wading birds nest on the refuge, and thousands of shorebirds can be found on tidal mudflats and deltaic splays. Numerous furbearers and game mammals are year-round residents, and the marshes and waterways provide year-round and seasonal habitat for a diversity of fish and shellfish species. Raptors are not uncommon on Delta NWR. Ospreys are common winter visitors to the refuge. The following threatened and endangered species may be present within the refuge: American alligator, brown pelican, Arctic peregrine falcon, piping plover. Given the heavy seas and high winds, it is thought that most of the birds species would have moved to the interior of the delta marshes rather than the coastal margins and nearshore coastal habitats. When the wind and sea state subsides, they will return to these areas. [SEP] These were produced on Saturday, Jan 19th with no info on oil type, or oil amount. These trajectories were produced only to provide a prospective as to the possible fate and trajectory should there be a significant release. CG was not able to get a helicopter to do an overflight prior to trajectories being completed. SAR cases and weather had delayed an overflight. These trajectories should be used as a bound on where the oil may go. [SEP] The USCG report that a crew boat, the M/V F M BROWN, allided with a wellhead in Breton Sound Block 52 before dawn on 19 January 2008. The vessel's master claimed the wellhead was unlit and did not appear on radar. Vessel returned to port and was moored in Venice. Upon inspection, the pilothouse windows were blown out and starboard handrails were damaged. No hull damage, no water ingress, and no injuries were reported. It was initially reported that well was leaking natural gas (and possibly crude oil), but none was observed during the overflight. There is still an element of mystery related to this bump in the night, and while the sun has since risen three times, questions remain. The owner of the facility remains unknown. The NRC reports that were submitted on 19 January are reported to not reflect the RP. If the well was initially releasing gas and oil, what happened? This Hotline Report will be updated as additional information is known. [SEP] On Saturday afternoon, 19 January 2008, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a vessel hitting a oil and gas well. The time of the incident was approximately 0400 hrs. The skipper of the vessel reported that he could smell oil and gas, but in the dark, could see nothing. The reported position is just 4.5 miles S of Breton National Wildlife Refuge and 9 miles NNE of the Delta National Wildlife Refuge. The USCG responded in the SAR mode, but little information as to the damage of the well or possible oil release on water is available. Bad weather and other SAR response actions have delayed any follow up overflight assessments for pollution. The owner of the well remains an unknown. There are two NRC reports that identify Century Oil Exploration, but they also report that they do not belive the well is one they operate (the reports were made only because they were investigating the incident at the request of the USCG). The USCG has requested that NOAA provide a trajectory analysis with respect to what that probably transport and fate of oil should this be an active release. Given the degree of uncertainty, such analyses will err on the conservative making an assumption that there would be a continued release of crude oil from a damaged wellhead. The initial, first cut, trajectory suggested that the Delta National Wildlife Refuge would be at risk based on current weather. NOAA's Home Team is in the process of developing a full trajectory analysis. At this time of year, migratory waterfowl would be at risk at the refuge. Additional information will follow as it becomes available. [SEP] NOAA Chart of area [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
965 ft Container vessel lost power and grounded in Savannah River while inbound. [SEP] USCG D7 informed the SSC that the vessel was refloated without incident of pollution at 1330. The vessel will be towed to the anchorage for a hull damage inspection and to assess the power plant issue that led to the grounding.
Last Friday, 11 January 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a reported gas/oil well release in West Cote Blanche Bay.  Apparently, the well was hit by something and was releasing a water/gas/oily mixture.  The USCG had released a broadcast for vessels to stay clear.  It was reported that the plume extended about 20-30 feet in the air, and the volume of oil released was unknown.  The oil well was shut in shortly afterwards and only sheen on the water was observed. [SEP] Overflight photograph from 11 Jan. provided by LOSCO from RP's IMT. [SEP] Overflight photograph from 11 Jan. provided by LOSCO from RP's IMT. [SEP] Last Friday, 11 January 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a reported gas/oil well release in West Cote Blanche Bay. Apparently, the well was hit by something and is releasing a water/gas/oily mixture. The USCG had released a broadcast for vessels to stay clear that morning. It was reported that the plume extended about 20-30 feet in the air, and the volume of oil released was unknown. A 5 bbl/day estimate of the flow rate was provided by the RP. The position of the wellhead was reported as 29?? 41' 41" N. Lat. 091?? 48' 46" W. Long. At the time of the notification, the winds had shifted with the passing of a cold front pushing the residual oil offshore. The Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office provided additional incident and response information, and much of that information was used to generate this report. While awaiting the results of an overflight (and before the NOAA SSC could provide a full trajectory analysis), the well had been reported shut in and only sheen remained on the water surface. Other than a verbal trajectory, no additional support was provided by NOAA on this incident in part because the SSC was initially engaged in meetings with FEMA and the USCG related to Marine Debris and unavailable. Once the results of the overflight were known, the incident was essentially closed and no additional trajectory support was required. During the overflight, the OSRO observed a silver and rainbow sheen adjacent to the well but no recoverable oil. This report will serve as the Initial and Final Hotline Report provided by the NOAA SSC. Additional Information. Apparently, the US Coast Guard initially notified the RP that the well was blowing Oil, Gas and produced water. The well cribbing was reported to be extensively damaged and reported as missing. It was suspected that a vessel had ran into the well during the foggy early morning hours. An Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) responded to site to assist all remedial actions. The sheen released from the site reported to be 1 mile by 90 feet wide and heavy rainbow in color. The estimate flow rates provided by the RP for normal well production were 510 bbls of produced water (formation water) and 5 bbls of crude oil per day. Impact to the shoreline at Grand Isle were unknown, but there was thought to be minor impact initially before the wind direction changed. No additional details are known.
The NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Sector NY of a mystery sheen extending from the Hackensack River out Newark Bay into the Kill Van Kull. As of the notification no source had been identified. The USCG is investigating. [SEP] CG Investigates Mystery Oil Sheen U.S. Coast Guard | December 31, 2007 NEW YORK - The Coast Guard is investigating a mystery oil sheen in Newark Bay, N.J., that was discovered at 11 a.m. today. Coast Guard Sector New York was initially notified by a Sandy Hook pilot aboard the motor vessel HS Bizet. The master of the tug boat James Turecamo subsequently reported a dense sheen of unknown substance near Port Elizabeth and Port Newark at 12 p.m. Other vessel operators also reported sighting the sheen throughout the afternoon. A Coast Guard Auxiliary overflight confirmed a sheen in the Kill Van Kull extending through Newark Bay and into the Hackensack River. Coast Guard pollution investigators collected samples of a deisel-like product. Investigators also conducted a port sweep to visibly inspect all merchant vessels moored at Port Elizabeth and Port Newark, but were unable to determine a spill source. Reports indicate the sheen is dissipating. The Coast Guard is asking merchant vessels in the port area to voluntarily provide oil and bilge samples for comparison. "Coast Guard investigators will examine the samples taken from the site and compare them to samples taken from vessels in the surrounding area," said Lt. j.g. Elisabeth Murtha, a watch officer at Coast Guard Sector New York. "If we can find a correlation between the sample collected from the water and a sample provided by a merchant vessel, we may take further action." Coast Guard Sector New York employs a Vessel Traffic Service that tracks vessel movements similarly to an air traffic control system. Coordinating with the Vessel Traffic Service, pollution investigators will be able to learn which vessels were in the Newark Bay area during the time leading up to the initial sightings of the sheen. "It's never a good thing when oil makes its way into our waterways, but we're fortunate that this is a lighter sheen that dissipates rather quickly and causes minimal environment impact," said Murtha. http://www.military.com/features/0,15240,159173,00.html
A train derailed in Saginaw Michigan at approximately 2040 December 27, no hazardous material has been released into the environment, but there is potential of 125T of Acrylonitrile.  The location of the derailed train is approximately 600' from the Saginaw River. [SEP] Train Carrying Hazardous Materials Derails Derailment Brings Hazmat Team To Saginaw Scene [NEWSVINE: Train Carrying Hazardous Materials Derails] Firefighters said four of the five cars that derailed at Wadsworth Avenue near Veterans Memorial Parkway appear to be harmless. Officials said the train was bound for Dow's Michigan Operations manufacturing site. Hazardous materials experts from Dow arrived to offer help and police quickly secured and barricaded the area. Northbound Highway 675 at Interstate 75 and southbound Highway 675 at Davenport Avenue is now open.
NOAA received notification of a well blowout near Belle Pass approximately 15 miles SW of Patterson, LA from both the Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office (LOSCO) and USCG MSU Morgan City. It was reported that a kickback of natural gas occurred resulting in a well blowout. Initial reports stated that the well was discharging an unknown amount of natural gas and condensate. Some estimates suggest that approximately 50 barrels of condensate were discharge at the time or shortly after the kickback. At this time, the well has not ignited. [SEP] The following information was derived from an update provided by LOSCO. All 22 personnel that were conducting the drilling operations were safely evacuated and no injuries were reported. The well blowout and release of gas and condensate is continuing, and has not ignited. The gas cloud and visible plume is traveling in a westerly direction from the well. The Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) on-scene indicated an unknown sheen has been observed in Belle Isle Lake. Cudd Well Control (wild well control specialist) has been contracted to perform the well control operations and the initial well assessment will be completed by 1500 today. A command post has been initiated at ES&H in Houma, LA. The anticipated production rate for the well is +/-2 million cubic feet of natural gas and 100 barrels of condensate per day (24 hours). The updated well location is reported as: 29 degrees 31 minutes 23 seconds N Lat. 091 degrees 23 minutes 12 seconds W Long. [SEP] Overflight photograph from PM flight, 18 Dec. 2007 (Credit, RP's Spill Management Team, ES&H). [SEP] Location map provided by LOSCO. [SEP] A approximately 1235 hours on 22 December 2007, the Belle Isle Incident transitioned from an emergency phase into a project phase. The well blowout had been secured. The NWS was contacted to discontinue the notification related to this incident. Minimal environmental injury has been reported to date. [SEP] Overflight photograph from PM flight, 18 Dec. 2007 (Credit, RP's Spill Management Team, ES&H). [SEP] TIME: 1330 CST Tuesday, December 18, 2007 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: Robert Jones NOAA/Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Phoenix Well Blowout FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT: NOAA OFFICE OF RESPONSE AND RESTORATION, EMERGENCY RESPONSE DIVISION, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at the air hazard implications of the release from the Phoenix Well blowout, Belle Pass, Iberia Parish, LA. The anticipated production rate for the well is +/-2 million cubic feet of natural gas and 100 barrels of condensate per day (24 hours). The well blowout and release of gas and condensate is continuing, and has not ignited. The gas cloud and visible plume is traveling in a westerly direction from the well. The well location is reported as: 29??31'23"N - 091??23'12"W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect hazard implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today: SE winds at 10 knots. Slight chance of showers. Tonight: SE winds at 5 knots. Slight chance of showers. Wednesday: SE winds at 10 knots increasing to 15 knots. chance of showers and thunderstorms. 2) AIR HAZARD: Fire Hazard: Methane is the dominant gaseous component of natural gas, though some higher molecular weight hydrocarbons can also be present in significant amounts. Flash fire is the main hazard associated with natural gas releases. As the natural gas travels downwind from the release point it mixes with air and forms a cloud consisting of a fuel-air mixture which can ignite; historically, significant numbers fatalities have been associated with flash fires from accidental releases. Lightning from possible thunderstorms could provide an ignition source, but it is unlikely. Under the wind conditions anticipated through Wednesday, the hazard zone from the gas, as defined by the possible flammable cloud, will extend as far as 300 yards downwind, Rain and higher winds will diminish the threat zone somewhat. A small fraction of the higher molecular weight material can be carried downwind and deposited on the water. This material is also flammable and if the wind corrals this material into a pocket along the shore, it could also generate sufficient vapors to form a localized fire hazard, though this is an unlikely scenario. Inhalation hazard: The major chemical components associated with natural gas wells exhibit low acute toxicity to inhalation. If the concentration of natural gas is high enough, it may cause asphyxiation by displacing oxygen. The toxic inhalation threat zone is expected to be smaller than the flammable threat zone. Higher molecular weight compounds can travel downwind as an aerosol cloud and rain out. These particulates can be toxic by inhalation. We cannot model this but recommend that responders use visual cues to assess this hazard. Some less dominant components from a natural gas well can be very toxic. Sulfur compounds, like hydrogen sulfide, are highly toxic by inhalation and can be hard to detect. We do not have any information suggesting that there are significant sulfur compounds from this spill; however, we think it is important for the responders to be aware of this possibility. [SEP] PHOENIX WELL BLOWOUT, BELLE PASS, IBERIA PARISH, LA 1230 CDT, Tuesday Dec 18, 2007 Sunset (Dec 18) 1709 Sunrise (Dec 19) 0655 Sunset (Dec 19) 1709 Forecast: Today: SE winds at 10 knots. Tonight: SE winds at 5 knots. Wednesday: SE winds at 10 knots increasing to 15 knots. Seas: Today: coastal lakes and bays smooth. Tonight: coastal lakes and bays smooth. Wednesday: seas 2-4 feet. Precipitation: Today: slight chance of showers. Tonight: slight chance of showers. Wednesday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Visibility: Mostly clear skies are forecast. Temperature: The high is forecast to be in the mid to upper 60's, the low is predicted to be in the mid 50's. [SEP] Evening Report The Regional NOAA SSC arrived on-scene at the Houma Command Post at approximately 1600 hrs. The situation had not significantly changed from the earlier update. NOAA met with the USCG on-scene representative and the incident management team representing the RP. The primary objective was to insure the protection of the public and responders by keeping duck hunters and fishermen out of the area and conduct monitoring to insure safe responder activities. NOAA had provided an assessment of the plume threat from a Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) prospective using a 10% of the LEL for Methane and modeling the plume as a heavy gas to account in part for the affect of the condensate and water vapor. The general safety guidelines established by the response was a 1-mile exclusion zone: this value was greater than the modeling distance provided by NOAA for fire and explosion risk. The wild well team had conducted a preliminary assessment and was considering a tactic of engaging the blowout prevention manually (not sure how that will be done, but more information may be available at the morning planning meeting). The SSC connected the USCG with the NWS to provide a warning broadcast on the National Weather Service Broadcast similar to the notice broadcast to mariners. Some boom has been deployed, but the slick from the condensate that has rained out in Belle Lake was reported as light. There was consideration of the placement of sorbent boom materials in key location if it could be done safely. NOAA Personnel On-Scene: Charlie Henry, SSC [SEP] PHOENIX WELL BLOWOUT, BELLE PASS, IBERIA PARISH, LA 1100 CDT, Wednesday Dec 19, 2007 Sunset (Dec 19) 1709 Sunrise (Dec 20) 0655 Sunset (Dec 20) 1709 Forecast: Today: SE winds at 5-10 knots increasing to 10-15 knots in the afternoon. Tonight: S winds at 10-15 knots. Thursday: SW winds at 15-20 knots becoming W in the afternoon. Thursday night: NW winds 10-15 knots becoming N 5-10 knots late. Friday: SE winds 15-20 knots. Saturday: NW winds 20-25 knots. Sunday: NE winds 15-20 knots. Seas: Today: seas 2 feet, coastal lakes and bays smooth becoming a light chop. Tonight: seas 2-3 feet, coastal lakes and bays light chop. Thursday: seas 2-3 feet, coastal lakes and bays choppy. Thursday night: 2-3 feet, coastal lakes and bays light chop. Friday: 2-4 feet, coastal lakes and bays choppy. Saturday: 5-6 feet, coastal lakes and bays rough. Sunday: 3-4 feet, coastal lakes and bays choppy. Precipitation: Today: slight chance of showers. Tonight: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Thursday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Some thunderstorms may be severe in the morning hours. Friday: slight chance of showers and thunderstorms. Saturday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Sunday: slight chance of showers. Visibility: Mostly cloudy skies are forecast through Thursday night. Friday, mostly clear skies are expected. Saturday, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Sunday, mostly clear skies are forecast. Temperature: The high is forecast to be in the low 70's, the low is predicted to be in the mid to upper 50's. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Belle Isle 1-42 Well Blowout, LA I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 1145 EST on 18 December 2007. This report describes resources
At approximately 2100 M/V ALGO NORTH collided with a pier at the Toledo Overseas Terminal on the Maumee River in Toledo, Ohio. A line parted while the vessel was getting underway, one longshoreman was injured. Initial report is 2500 gallons of diesel and 1/2Ton of heavy fuel oil in the water. [SEP] Note that 1/2 ton (short ton of 2000 lbs) is 122 gallons of oil 1/2 metric ton is about 135 gallons of oil [SEP] 2330 14 DEC [SEP] Map [SEP] Fuel tank hole [SEP] Oil Name = IFO 300 API = 11.9 Pour Point = 21 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 12 knots Wave Height = 2 ft Water Temperature = 32 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 14, 2100 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 130 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 130 - 2 - 0 - 98 2 130 3 0 97 4 130 - 4 - 0 - 96 6 130 5 0 95 8 130 - 6 - 0 - 94 10 130 7 0 93 12 130 - 7 - 0 - 93 18 130 9 0 91 24 130 - 9 - 0 - 91 30 130 10 0 90 36 130 - 10 - 0 - 90 42 130 11 0 89 48 130 - 11 - 0 - 89 54 130 11 0 89 60 130 - 11 - 0 - 89 66 130 12 0 88 72 130 - 12 - 0 - 88 78 130 12 0 88 84 130 - 12 - 0 - 88 90 130 12 0 88 96 130 - 13 - 0 - 87 102 130 13 0 87 108 130 - 13 - 0 - 87 114 130 13 0 87 120 130 - 13 - 0 - 87 [SEP] Detailed map [SEP] photos [SEP] M/V Algo North, Maumee River, OH 2330 EST, Friday, December 14, 2007 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunrise (12/15): 7:54 a.m. Sunset (12/15): 5:05 p.m. **WARNINGS** Winter storm to affect Ohio and Pennsylvania this weekend. A storm system will move to the Ohio valley by Sunday morning. It will be a significant storm. There is still some question as to the exact track and strength of the storm. Winter storm warning remains in effect from 12 pm Saturday to 4 pm est Sunday. ************ 36 Hour forecast: Tonight: East wind around 11 knots. Mostly cloudy. Waves 2 feet or less. Lows in the mid twenties Saturday: East wind between 10 and 15 knots. Periods of snow, mainly after noon. Waves 2 feet or less. Highs around 30 Saturday Night: Northeast wind between 13 and 20 knots. Periods of snow. Waves 2 feet or less. Lows in the mid 20s Sunday: North wind between 16 and 21 knots. Periods of snow with areas of blowing snow, mainly before noon. Waves 2 feet or less. Highs around 30. River Flow: The Maumee river is currently above flood stage aboput 30 miles upstream of Toledo. Flow levels are now dropping, expected to drop below flood levels by Sunday morning. Estimated flow rate at the peak was 14,700 cfs. ten miles upstream from the mouth of the river, and is currently dropping. Ice: Ice cover is reported to be less than two inches thick. [SEP] Google Map [SEP] Years of wisdom about small diesel spills. [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (ALASKA) API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 12 knots Wave Height = 2 ft Water Temperature = 32 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 14, 2100 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 2,500 - 11 - 1 - 88 2 2,500 21 5 74 4 2,500 - 33 - 17 - 50 6 2,500 37 28 34 8 2,500 - 39 - 36 - 24 10 2,500 41 42 18 12 2,500 - 42 - 45 - 13 [SEP] To: NOAA SSC Elizabeth Jones From: NOAA/Emergency Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: M/V Algo North DATE: December 15, 2007 0000 EST FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526 4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a release of oil from the M/V Algo North. These notes are based on the following information: At 2100 EST approximately 2500 gal of Diesel Fuel, and 1/2 ton of Heavy Fuel oil was released from the M/V Algo North in the Maumee River, Toledo, OH. The location is: 24d41.49'N - 83d28.01'W. There is ice in the river of less than two inches. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Winds: Tonight and tomorrow, East winds between 10-15 knots are expected, shifting to the North at 15-20 knots Sunday River Flow: The Maumee river is currently above flood stage about 30 miles upstream of Toledo. Flow levels are now dropping, expected to drop below flood levels by Sunday morning. Estimated flow rate at the peak was 14,700 cfs. ten miles upstream from the mouth of the river, and is currently dropping. Ice: Ice cover is reported to be less than two inches thick on the lake. In the river, ice cover is expected to be minimal, with perhaps some ice around the shoreline. 2) TRAJECTORY: The spill location is very near the mouth of the river. The oil will likely be moved into the lake by the river flow, then the movement will be dominated by the winds. The predicted East wind will tend to move any oil in the lake to the West, toward the shore. Areas of shoreline impact are likely to be Grassy Island, the shore to the West, and perhaps as far as North Cape. In addition, if the dredge spoils liking the channel are exposed, they may see some impacts as well. Shoreline impacts from the diesel would be a bathtub ring stain. It is unclear the exact ice coverage. If there is significant shore ice, the oil will hang up on the ice, rather than the impacting the shoreline directly. 3) OIL FATE: Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as 'marine diesel'. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. In this case, the low temperatures will slow the evaporation of the diesel, so it will persist longer than usual. Shoreline impacts from the diesel would be a bathtub ring stain. Heavy fuel oil has a much greater persistence. At the low temperatures, it may be near its pour point. It may be observed tomorrow as scattered tarballs, or, if cold enough, as waxy clumps. It's possible that the oil may stick to sediments, making it heavier. If floating low in the water, these clumps will travel farther into the lake than the diesel sheen. The reported quantity of Fuel Oil is only about 130 gallons, so there may not be any visible tomorrow unless it was beached soon after being released. There is a chance that the heavy oil could sink, especially if there is a high sediment load in the river, but if that's the case then it won't be observed. The following are the results from the NOAA Adios Oil Weathering model for the Diesel fuel. Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (ALASKA) API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 12 knots Wave Height = 2 ft Water Temperature = 32 deg F Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 2,500 11 1 88 2 2,500 21 5 74 4 2,500 33 17 50 6 2,500 37 28 34 8 2,500 39 36 24 10 2,500 41 42 18 12 2,500 42 45 13 The following are the results of the NOAA Adios2 Oil Weathering model for a Heavy Fuel oil. This indicates that the oil will persist. However, with only a 130 or so gallons spilled, there may not be much visible by tomorrow Oil Name = IFO 300 API = 11.9 Pour Point = 21 deg F Wind Speed =
The SSC was notified by USCG at approx. 1600LT 11Dec07, that a crew boat (M/V Lady Marie) hit a well the previous night in Main Pass 44, Breton Sound, LA. The vessel is still afloat and attached to the well platform. Vessel reports 7,000 gals fuel and 100 gal lube oil on board. No oil pollution reported from vessel or well at this time. USCG requests trajectory for potential release. [SEP] Photograph of incident provided by USCG. The picture was taken on 11 Dec. 2007. [SEP] On 11 December 2007, the NOAA Regional Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a marine casualty and active SAR case. There was no pollution reported, but there was a potential for a release due to the vessel fuel tanks. The SSC coordinated with the NOAA Emergency Response Division Home Team to provide a trajectory analysis for the USCG. Additional Background Information: A crew boat struck a small wellhead platform last night in Main Pass 44, Breton Sound, Louisiana. There was no pollution in the water, but NOAA was requested to provide a trajectory on the potential threats should there be a spill. The vessel was estimated to be carrying approximately 7,000 gallons of fuel onboard and another 100 gallons of lube oil at the time of the incident. The reported position was 29?? 39' 69" N Lat. 089?? 10' 71" W Long. This position places the vessel in Breton Sound and just over nine miles N of Breton Island. The vessel is thought to be securely attached to the platform. Also, the collision bulkhead appears to be completely intact, so the vessel is expected to float once detached from the platform. The vessel owner has a surveyor en route to develop a salvage plan. The Platform is Chevron's MP 44 KC, Lease OCS-G 03338 in Federal waters based on a Supreme Court Decree Line (circa 1975). Chevron has shut-in the platform. [SEP] Map [SEP] The vessel remains attached to the platform. There are four wellheads contained within the structure. In the update from the USCG, one of the lines was reported to be "bent" by the vessel, and the vessel may actually be resting on or directly against it. Because of the potential for a release to this pipeline as well as the diesel aboard the vessel, the USCG has requested an updated trajectory to include both potential threats. The production rate for the well in question was reported to be 160 bbls/day of a 53 API oil, but a realistic worse case discharge would probably be less given that the system is reported shut in.A salvage plan was received for review. Additional information about the incident: M/V Lady Marie was reported to be in route to the MP 73 field when it struck what was reported as a caisson at approximately 0500 hours. There were injuries, but the number and extent are not known at present. [SEP] Date; Dec. 11, 2007 1900 CST To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA 98115 PREPARED BY: Chris Barker SUBJECT: M/V Lady Marie collision with well in Main Pass 44 FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT: NOAA EMERGENCY RESPONSE DIVISION, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: On Monday evening a crew boat collided with a well in Main Pass 44. The location is reported as 29??39.69'N by 089??10.71' W. The vessel has 7,000 gallons of diesel on board. No oil is in the water. The vessel is securely attached to the platform and is expected to float once it is detached from the platform. There is also some concern that wellhead pipe that was bent in the accident could possibly result in a release when the vessel is moved. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast: Tonight: South winds around 10 knots. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Thursday: South winds 5 to 10 knots. Seas 1 to 2 feet. Thursday night: Southeast winds 5 to 10 knots becoming northeast in the late evening. Seas 1 to 2 feet. Friday: East winds 5 to 10 knots. Seas 2 feet. Extended outlook: Winds are expected to become stronger from the South Saturday, shifting to the North and Northeast Sunday-Monday. 2) Trajectory Analysis: Should diesel fuel from the vessel spill tonight or tomorrow under the S wind conditions, the resulting sheen will move to the North, resulting in no expected shoreline impacts. If a release occurs under the Southeast winds predicted for Thursday night, there is a chance of scattered sheen impacting Chicot Island to the NW within 10 - 12 hours. If the oil is spilled Friday under East wind conditions, we do not expect any oil to persist long enough to make a noticeable impact to land. If there is a release from the well, the movement of any spilled oil will follow the same trajectory as for the diesel fuel discussed above. However, it may be a larger spill and a more persistent material, and therefor could have farther reaching impacts. The light winds forecast for the next few days will result in fairly slow movement of the oil. However, the strong North winds predicted for Sunday could move the oil up to about 15 miles to the South in 24 hours. With the forecast winds, we do not expect any oil spilled through Friday to threaten Breton I. However, if there is a large spill Sunday, under the expected North winds, there is some chance of impact to the island after about 16 hours from the release. No other land is expected to be impacted within 24 hours of any release. 3) Oil Fate: The following are the results of NOAA's ADIOS model for a diesel fuel: Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 80 deg F Total Amount of Oil Released = 7,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 7,000 - 6 - 1 - 93 2 7,000 13 3 84 3 7,000 - 20 - 7 - 73 4 7,000 26 13 61 5 7,000 - 31 - 21 - 49 6 7,000 34 27 39 7 7,000 - 35 - 33 - 32 8 7,000 37 37 26 9 7,000 - 38 - 41 - 21 10 7,000 38 44 18 11 7,000 - 39 - 47 - 14 12 7,000 39 49 12 13 7,000 - 39 - 51 - 10 The following are the results of NOAA's ADIOS model for a representative Main Pass Condensate, for an estimated release of a 160bbls/day: Oil Name = MAIN PASS 49 CONDENSATE, SHELL OIL API = 54.6 Pour Point = -46 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 80 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 12, 1500 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 160 bbl ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill bbl percent percent percent 1 7 - 81 - 2 - 17 2 13 84 3 13 4 27 - 83 - 3 - 14 6 40 83 3 14 8 53 - 84 - 4 - 13 10 67 84 4 12 12 80 - 84 - 4 - 12 14 93 85 4 11 16 107 - 85 - 4 - 11 18 120 85 4 11 20 133 - 85 - 4 - 11 22 147 85 4 11 24 160 - 85 - 5 - 10 [SEP] Photograph of incident provided by USCG. The picture was taken on 11 Dec. 2007. [SEP] The USCG reports, "The vessel was salvaged. However, the damage assessment of the well still pends." [SEP] Photograph of incident provided by USCG. The picture was taken on 11 Dec. 2007. [SEP] Date; Dec. 11, 2007 1900 CST To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry / USCG MST1 Dana.L.Standley FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Crew boat collision with well in Main Pass 44 FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: On Monday evening a crew boat collided with a well in Main Pass 44. The location is reported as 29??39.69'N by 089??10.71' W. The vessel has 7,000 gallons of diesel on board. No oil is in the water. The vessel is securely attached to the platform and is expected to float once it is detached from the platform. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Tuesday night: Winds from the SE at 10 - 15 knots with 2-3 foot seas Wednesday: Winds from the SE at 10 - 15
Tug at south end of port is grounded and taking on water with 2000 gal of diesel and 75 gal of lube oil on board.  USCG request trajectory, oil fate, and weather. [SEP] Detailed map [SEP] tide heights [SEP] Date; Dec. 8, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded Tug Ocean 1 FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The Tug Ocean 1 is grounded south of Port Everglades, about 1 mile south of the Dania Canal cutoff at 26?? 2.90' N by 080?? 6.92' W. It it taking on water and has 2000 gallons of diesel and 75 gallons of lube oil. There is no spill at the present time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast E winds at 10 - 20 knots today and Sunday. 2) Trajectory Analysis Should 2000 gallons of diesel spill: With the vessel being on the W side of the channel and the forecast E winds, any spill will impact the W bank within 30 minutes. On an ebb tide we would expect a sheen to reach the Dania Town Canal and enter the Canal on the subsequent flood. On a flood tide we would expect a sheen to extend south for about 1/4 - 1/2 mile along the west bank. 3) Oil Fate Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = 1 ft Water Temperature = 80 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 8, 0800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 2,000 - 11 - 0 - 89 2 2,000 21 2 78 4 2,000 - 34 - 6 - 60 6 2,000 41 9 50 8 2,000 - 44 - 13 - 43 10 2,000 47 16 38 12 2,000 - 49 - 18 - 33 18 2,000 53 24 23 24 2,000 - 55 - 28 - 17 30 2,000 56 31 13 36 2,000 - 57 - 33 - 10 [SEP] Small Diesel writeup [SEP] large map [SEP] Weather Forecast for Tug Ocean 1 Saturday, Dec. 8. 1100 EST Sunset (12/8): 1730 EST Sunrise (12/8): 0656 EST Sunset (12/8): 1730 EST Winds: This afternoon: Winds from E at 10 - 15 knots Tonight: Winds from E at 10 - 15 knots Sunday: Winds from E at 10 - 15 knots Seas: Today and Sunday Moderate chop in exposed areas Extended outlook: East winds 10 - 20 knots through Wednesday
A crane barge owned by Samsung collided with the M/V HEBEI SPIRIT on December 8, 2007, 10 km (6.2 miles) off the coast of South Korea, west of Taean county.  The M/V HEBEI SPIRIT sustained 3 large punctures and subsequently released an estimated 2.8 million gallons of crude oil.  The vessel is currently anchored and has temporary patches on all of the punctures.  Over 160 km (100 miles) of coastline have been impacted, with the heaviest concentrations of oil being Teaen county and points 30 miles to the north.Reports from the joint USCG/NOAA team assisting the Korean Coast Guard. [SEP] Buried oil on Mallipo beach. Photo credit: NOAA [SEP] Evening Report 16 December 2007 Hebei Spirit Korea Sunday we went to KCGHQ and meet with their Research and Development Lab manager. We had a tour of their facility and discussed the results of testing on the spilled oil. It turns out there were different cargos in each of the three tanks that were holed. The general description of the oils was Light Arabian Crude. The R&D manager promised to get us the testing results translated into English. We are still awaiting that report. I did get photos of the chromatography graphs and asked our chemists to send me an interpretation. Still awaiting this also. After the lab we spent time in the KCG International Affairs Office beginning to draft our recommendations report. Following that we had a meeting with the Deputy Director and Assistant Director of the Korean Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries (MOMAF). They were interested in our recommendations also. They have requested a C-130 with ADDS pack from EARL to Korea on standby while the tanker is moved to a dock for repairs. It was explained to us that the KCG is in charge of the on-water response (up to the high tide line) and MOMAF is coordinating the other response activities and issues with regional and local authorities. MOMAF will be attending the Tuesday meeting. Monday we are scheduled to drive to Seoul to brief the US Embassy staff and Ambassador on our activities. Tuesday the KCG is coordinating a meeting with all the international advisors (UNDP, UNEP, Japan, EU, ITOPF, and the US Team) now in country. The current plan is to use our draft report as an outline for the agenda. The group would have discussions on the issues we observed and make one report with recommendation, rather than six reports. Hopefully we will be able to reach a consensus. I anticipate that the report with have a range of options for the KCG to draw from. [SEP] Photo taken one week after internet news photo. Remarkable progress. Source Ed Levine, NOAA. [SEP] Source Ed Levine (NOAA). [SEP] Joint evening report [SEP] NOAA and USCG meet with Korean officials to discuss spill details. Photo credit: USCG [SEP] Photo of oil analysis by Korean Coast Guard R & D Lab of T/V Hebei Spirit oil from #1 (P) and #5 (C) tanks. [SEP] Source Ed Levine (NOAA). [SEP] Press photo of the group sent to us by Dr Kahng. [SEP] 12/21 Press Conference [SEP] Source Ed Levine (NOAA). [SEP] Workers cleaning up the shoreline following the Hebei Spirit oil spill in Korea. Photo credit: NOAA.
On 4 December 2007, an estimated 3 barrel condensate and natural gas spill was reported in Red Pass, near the Targa DGS Facility in the Venice area of the Mississippi River.  The release was not secured at this time and the actual source was unknown.  The estimated discharge rate was estimated at 1 to 2 barrels per hour, and a visible sheen 0.25 miles long was reported.  An unknown area of marsh has been impacted. [SEP] Photograph shows the location where oil and gas was bubbling up from leak site (credit, LDEQ). [SEP] Initial overflight photograph showing release source (image was provided by USCG, but actual credit is unknown). [SEP] Photograph taken during overflight on 5 Dec. showing FRU and skimming at the boom near the source (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Photograph of oil source latter in the day, 4 Dec. (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] On 6 Dec., NOAA attended a meeting with USCG at the Chevron Command Post. At this time the line was secured and most of the cleanup was expected to be completed by that evening or the next day. The RP reported that their calculations estimated that 11.1 bbls was released based on recovery amounts and evaporative loss calculated using ADIOS. This value may be an underestimate, but all indications suggest that very little unrecoverable oil remained in the environment. The response was well contained in an area along the canal. The plan was for the response to shift to a project repair of the pipeline. A cofferdam was manufactured and shipped to the site to facilitate the repair operation. The OSRO supervisor on-site reported that they are observing a periodic sheen coming from the leak site. The RP is maintaining personnel and response equipment on-site to maintain the boom and to be available in the event of any significant release of oil from the pipeline as the repair operation progresses. As of 13 Dec., no additional concerns have been reported to NOAA by the USCG. The USCG is continuing to monitor the repair operation. Unless the situation changes, this entry will serve as the Final ResponseLink Report. [SEP] NOAA map showing the location of incident. [SEP] Photograph shows the boom down from leak site (credit, LDEQ). There is very little oil shown. [SEP] Initial overflight photograph showing oil near marsh bank (image was provided by USCG, but actual credit is unknown). [SEP] This was the situation map on 6 Dec. 2007. At present, the site is only boomed at the leak source. [SEP] The following is derived from information provided by USCG Sector New Orleans: Based upon pressure testing, it is believed that the 26-inch natural gas pipeline owned and operated by Chevron is the source of the leaking product into Red Pass. Chevron is actively working to de-pressurize the line and to secure the source. An estimated 30 barrels of product has been discharged and has impacted an estimated 1.5 miles of shoreline (marsh). Besides the natural gas, there is also crude in the line as the company did pump crude into it after Hurricane Katrina. Chevron has established an Incident Command Post in New Orleans at their corporate office downtown. An Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) was responded with hard boom/sorbent boom, drum skimmers, vacuum truck, a marco skimmer, and the Fast Response Unit (FRU) GRAND BAY. Boom has been placed around the source and is being deployed along the shoreline. 3,000 feet of boom has been deployed at this time. Additionally, USCG personnel are on scene overseeing the operations and have been coordinating with LADEQ, LOSCO, LAWLF, and NOAA SSC representatives. There have been no reports of wildlife impact or press related interest at this time. The current strategy is secure the source and maintain containment to minimize the area impacted. The SSC will continue to coordinate with the USCG and the State relative to cleanup once the source is secured. There is on-site air monitoring near the source for personnel safety. A meeting with all principal parties is planned for Thursday morning. The SSC will be in attendance. [SEP] Photograph of oil in boom near source on 4 Dec. (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] The Regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was first notified of a possible spill at the Red Pass location by the State of Louisiana's Oil Spill Coordinator's Office on 4 December 2007. The initial report estimated a 3 bbl condensate and natural gas spill in Red Pass, near the Targa DGS Facility in the Venice area of the Mississippi River. The release was not secured at this time and the actual source was unknown. The estimated discharge rate was estimated at 1 to 2 barrels per hour, and a visible sheen 0.25 miles long was reported. An unknown area of marsh has been impacted. The location, based on the reported position in the NRC report was Latitude: 29?? 13' 30" N, Longitude: 089?? 23' 45" W. The SSC has been in contact with the USCG.
Sector Guam notified the Seattle HDO that the Barge Tamara had grounded on a reef in the local harbor a position stated below.   The barge had been supporting a dive operation that was working on the outfall of  a local sewage plant.  The barge grounded at 0630, Dec. 4, and has 1500 gallons of diesel in a single on-deck double-walled tank, that was not leaking.   The barge seemed to be in tact and was not taking on water.   Coast Guard request to NOAA was for weather, tides and currents, a trajectory for a possible release and resources at risk and impact on the coral reef.  SPOT forecasts were provided by the NWS Guam, and NOAA Hazmat provided the remaining products.  Meanwhile the RP hired a salvor out of Singapore, and by Thursday, Dec. 6 (LT), the barge had been successfully removed from its grounding on the reef, and was taken to a local harbor for inspection and repairs.  The response case was closed. [SEP] Map2 [SEP] Map [SEP] MEDIA UPDATE: The salvage company and the owner of the June T have developed a plan to remove the barge Tamara 5 from the reef in Hagatna Bay today. Minor changes are being made to the plan under the guidance of the Coast Guard, Guam EPA, and the Department of Agriculture. The salvage company is preparing to move the barge during high tide, at about 5:00 p.m., using June T and a second tug boat. Coast Guard Response Boats will enforce the 1-mile safety zone during the salvage operation, and the public is reminded not to approach the barge. A Coast Guard Deployable Communications Unit will assist with coordination. If the effort today is successful, the barge will be towed into Apra Harbor after a Coast Guard inspection. An update will be provided after the salvage operation today. [SEP] Tidal Heights at APRA HARBOR, GUAM, Marianas, NORTH PACIFIC GROUPS Station No. 2631 Latitude: 13?? 26.50' N Longitude: 144?? 39.20' E Time offsets Hour:Min High Water 00:00 Low Water 00:00 High water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Based on APRA HARBOR (calculated from constituent data) From Tue Dec 04, 2007 to Thu Dec 13, 2007 (10 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Thu Dec 13, 2007; 11:10 am; 2.3ft Lowest Tide - Wed Dec 12, 2007; 03:00 am; -0.5ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 12/04/2007 04:04 +1.7 High Tue 09:21 +1.0 Low 15:48 +2.3 High 22:54 +0.5 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/05/2007 05:23 +1.8 High Wed 10:18 +1.2 Low 16:15 +2.3 High 23:31 +0.2 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/06/2007 06:23 +2.0 High Thu 11:14 +1.4 Low 16:42 +2.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/07/2007 00:06 -0.0 Low Fri 07:12 +2.1 High 12:07 +1.5 Low 17:12 +2.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/08/2007 00:40 -0.2 Low Sat 07:54 +2.2 High 12:56 +1.6 Low 17:43 +2.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/09/2007 01:14 -0.4 Low Sun 08:33 +2.3 High 13:39 +1.6 Low 18:16 +2.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/10/2007 01:48 -0.5 Low Mon 09:11 +2.3 High 14:20 +1.7 Low 18:50 +2.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/11/2007 02:24 -0.5 Low Tue 09:50 +2.3 High 14:59 +1.7 Low 19:25 +2.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/12/2007 03:00 -0.5 Low Wed 10:29 +2.3 High 15:39 +1.7 Low 20:01 +2.2 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/13/2007 03:37 -0.5 Low Thu 11:10 +2.3 High 16:23 +1.7 Low 20:39 +2.2 High [SEP] Sector Guam responding to grounding [SEP] BARGE TAMARA V, GUAM, PACIFIC OCEAN 0800 CHST, Dec. 6, 2007 Sunset (12/06): 1753 Sunrise (12/07): 0631 Sunset (12/07): 1753 36 Hour Forecast. -------------------------- Winds Thursday morning: winds from E at 15-20 knots with gust to 30 knots. Thursday afternoon: winds from E at 15-20 knots with gust to 30 knots. Thursday night: winds from E at 10-15 knots. Friday : winds from E at 15-20 knots with gust to 30 knots. --------------------------- Seas: Thursday morning: N Swell 2-4 feet, wind waves 3-5 feet. Thursday afternoon: N Swell 2-4 feet, wind waves 3-5 feet. Thursday night: N Swell 1-3 feet. Friday: light swell. --------------------------- Extended Forecast: No severe weather expected for the next 3-4 days. Trade wind conditions should continue. [SEP] barge Tamara V grounded on reef with tug June T standing by [SEP] NOAA chart2 [SEP] Weather forecast for grounded barge in Guam 1400 local time, Dec 4, 2007 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (12/04): 5:53 p.m. Sunrise (12/05): 6:30 a.m. Sunset (12/05): 5:53 p.m. 36 Hour Forecast. -------------------------- Winds Tuesday afternoon: Winds from E at 15 - 20 knots Tuesday night: Winds from E at 15 - 20 knots Wednesday : Winds from East at 15 - 20 knots --------------------------- Seas: Tuesday afternoon: N Swell at 3 feet, wind waves 5 - 7 feet from the E. Surf 2 - 4 feet. Tuesday night: N Swell at 3 feet, wind waves 4 - 6 feet from the E. Surf 2 - 4 feet. Wednesday : N Swell at 3 feet, wind waves 5 - 7 feet from the E. Surf 2 - 4 feet. --------------------------- Extended Forecast: No severe weather expected for the next 3 -4 days. Trade wind conditions should continue. [SEP] Resources at Risk [SEP] Tide Heights 12/05-07 [SEP] USCG Sector Guam reported that the deck barge TAMARA V was refloated December 6 at 1804 GST and is enroute to Apra Harbor.
USCG Sector Portland called 12/1 at 2 p.m. to report the Tug Deschutes is grounded and taking on water on the Snake River between miles 4 and 5 (near Pasco, about 4 miles from where the Snake River enters the Columbia River).  No significant oil release has occurred at this time.  The vessel is carrying approximately 6000 gallons of diesel fuel.  Sector Portland requested worst-case trajectory and oil fate information in the event of a release. [SEP] Date; Dec. 2, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Ruth Yender / USCG Jeffery Ramos FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Tug Deschutes grounding on Snake River. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The Tug Deschutes has grounded in the Snake River about 4.5 miles from where the Snake R enters the Columbia. This is near Pasco and Kennewick, Wa. The location is reported as 46?? 14.86'N by 118?? 57.702' W. The tug has 6,000 gallons of diesel fuel on board. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Wind warnings have been issued for the Pasco region. Expect 15 - 25 knot winds from the S with gusts to 40 this afternoon, and 20 - 30 knot winds from the S tonight and into Monday night. On Tuesday winds are expected to decrease to 10 - 20 knots. 2) River conditions At Ice Harbor Lock and Dam, just upriver from the grounding, the flow rate this afternoon is about 10,700 cfs. Daily fluctuations will result in flow rates as high as 25-30,000 cfs depending upon daily regional power demands. The Columbia River at McNary Dam downstream has a flow rate of 107,000 cfs. Daily fluctuations will range between 60,000 and 150,000 cfs, depending upon regional power demands. 2) Trajectory Analysis Should the 6,000 gallons of diesel spill in the next 2 days, we expect a sheen along the north side of the river for 2 - 5 miles depending upon what the flow rate of the river is at the time of the spill and the strength of the south winds. If the oil was lost under a high flow rate (25- 30k cfs) and moderate south winds (15 knots), a sheen will extend into the Columbia River, 4.5 miles downstream from the grounded tug, for about a mile. If the oil was lost under a low flow rate (10 - 15k cfs) and strong south winds (20-30 knots), a visible sheen would extend for about 2 - 3 miles along the north shore of the Snake River. With the daily fluctuations in the discharge of the Snake River we expect currents in the lower Snake to vary between 1/3 knot to 1.25 knots. With the tug apparently grounded along the north side of the river and strong south winds forecast, we expect the oil to move along the north shore of the river. Shoreline impacts will be bathtub ring type stain along the shore. 3) Oil Fate Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 20 mph Water Temperature = 45 deg F Total Amount of Oil Released = 6,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 6,000 - 25 - 4 - 71 3 6,000 34 9 57 4 6,000 - 40 - 15 - 45 5 6,000 43 20 36 6 6,000 - 46 - 25 - 29 7 6,000 47 28 24 8 6,000 - 49 - 31 - 20 9 6,000 49 34 17 10 6,000 - 50 - 36 - 14 11 6,000 50 38 12 12 6,000 - 50 - 39 - 10 [SEP] NOAA Chart [SEP] Google earth map of incident location. [SEP] Large scale Map [SEP] Bushy talked to P.O. Ramos on Tuesday, Dec 4th and was told that the grounded tug was successfully pulled off and taken to a facility. "Very little" oil was lost. Case closed.
Container vessel grounded at Elba Island in the Savanna River.  USCG called to request worst case release trajectory during anticipated refloating operations scheduled for the afternoon [SEP] Situation The USCG reports that the anchor chain was cut and the vessel has been towed and successfully moored for a hull inspection. No release occurred. A hull survey will take place to inspect for damage. USACE will survey the grounding site to determine if the anchor now poses a navigational hazard. SSC: B Benggio [SEP] Tidal Currents at Elba Island, NE of, Savannah River, SAVANNAH RIVER Station No. 7426 Meter Depth: 10 feet Latitude: 32?? 5.40' N Longitude: 80?? 59.60' W Maximum Flood Direction: 329?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 149?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood +01:01 Flood +00:40 Minimum Before Ebb -00:35 Ebb -00:27 Flood Speed Ratio: 0.60 Ebb Speed Ratio: 1.20 Based on SAVANNAH RIVER ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Tue Nov 27, 2007 to Thu Dec 06, 2007 (10 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 11/27/2007 01:24 -2.7 Max Ebb Tue 05:33 +0.0 Min Before Flood 07:59 +1.7 Max Flood 10:34 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 14:06 -3.0 Max Ebb 18:25 +0.0 Min Before Flood 20:30 +1.2 Max Flood 22:52 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 11/28/2007 02:20 -2.6 Max Ebb Wed 06:27 +0.0 Min Before Flood 08:51 +1.5 Max Flood 11:26 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 14:57 -2.9 Max Ebb 19:15 +0.0 Min Before Flood 21:23 +1.1 Max Flood 23:49 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 11/29/2007 03:17 -2.5 Max Ebb Thu 07:24 +0.0 Min Before Flood 09:46 +1.4 Max Flood 12:19 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 15:48 -2.7 Max Ebb 20:05 +0.0 Min Before Flood 22:19 +1.1 Max Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 11/30/2007 00:48 +0.0 Min Before Ebb Fri 04:17 -2.4 Max Ebb 08:23 +0.0 Min Before Flood 10:45 +1.2 Max Flood 13:12 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 16:41 -2.4 Max Ebb 20:57 +0.0 Min Before Flood 23:20 +1.1 Max Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 12/01/2007 01:46 +0.0 Min Before Ebb Sat 05:20 -2.3 Max Ebb 09:26 +0.0 Min Before Flood 11:48 +1.1 Max Flood 14:04 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 17:37 -2.2 Max Ebb 21:49 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 12/02/2007 00:19 +1.1 Max Flood Sun 02:41 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 06:23 -2.3 Max Ebb 10:28 +0.0 Min Before Flood 12:49 +1.0 Max Flood 14:57 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 18:34 -2.1 Max Ebb 22:40 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 12/03/2007 01:12 +1.1 Max Flood Mon 03:34 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 07:22 -2.4 Max Ebb 11:26 +0.0 Min Before Flood 13:43 +1.0 Max Flood 15:48 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 19:30 -2.0 Max Ebb 23:29 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 12/04/2007 01:59 +1.1 Max Flood Tue 04:24 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 08:15 -2.4 Max Ebb 12:19 +0.0 Min Before Flood 14:31 +1.0 Max Flood 16:38 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 20:21 -1.9 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 12/05/2007 00:16 +0.0 Min Before Flood Wed 02:43 +1.1 Max Flood 05:12 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 09:05 -2.4 Max Ebb 13:07 +0.0 Min Before Flood 15:16 +1.0 Max Flood 17:25 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 21:06 -1.8 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 12/06/2007 01:02 +0.0 Min Before Flood Thu 03:27 +1.1 Max Flood 05:59 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 09:51 -2.4 Max Ebb 13:53 +0.0 Min Before Flood 15:59 +1.0 Max Flood 18:11 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 21:47 -1.8 Max Ebb [SEP] MSC KOREA, SAVANNAH RIVER, GA 1230 EDT, Tuesday Nov 27, 2007 Sunset (Nov 27) 1720 Sunrise (Nov 28) 0704 Sunset (Nov 28) 1720 Forecast: Today: W winds 10 knots becoming NW at 10-15 knots Tonight: NW winds at 10-15 knots becoming N at 5-10 knots. Wednesday: NE winds 5-10 knots. Thursday: NW winds 5-10 knots. Seas: Today: light chop. Tonight: light chop. Wednesday: light chop. Thursday: light chop Precipitation: Today: no precipitation is forecast. Tonight: no precipitation is expected. Wednesday: no precipitation is predicted. Thursday: no precipitation is forecast. Visibility: Mostly sunny skies are expected. Temperature: The high is forecast to be in the mid to upper 60's, the low is predicted to be in the low to 50's. [SEP] Date: Nov. 27, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded vessel Savannah River FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: An 800 foot container vessel, MSC Korea, has grounded in the Savannah River this morning at Elba Island. The approximate position was given as 32?? 6.0'N by 081?? 0.0' W. The vessel has 4179 MT of heavy fuel oil onboard (1.1 million gallons). There is no leak at the present time. The plan is to pull the vessel off the mud bottom to a nearby facility this afternoon. We have been asked to look at the potential threat zone from a leak when the vessel is moved between 1500 and 1700 this afternoon. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Tonight winds are expected to be NW becoming N tomorrow at 5 - 10 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis A large oil spill between 1500 and 1700 today will result in oil moving upriver with the tidal current as far as Port Wentworth and Argyle Island by slack before ebb at 2300 tonight. On the subsequent ebb, the bulk of the oil would return downstream and extend downriver to Long Island. Depending on how the vessel leaks the oil over time, some oil could exit out into Tybee Roads by 0630 Wednesday morning. With the winds from the NW to N expected tonight the shoreline impacts will be along the south shore of the Savannah River. On the flood tide, the North end of Elba Island and downtown Savannah would get the heaviest impacts. Expect some impacts on the north side of Hutchinson I. On the ebb tide oil will enter South Channel and impact the north side of McQueen Island. Expect impacts to the Wilmingotn River and St Augustine Creek, south of McQueen Island. 3) Oil Fate From ADIOS II model. Heavy refined products, such as Fuel Oil No. 6 and HFO, have been refined to remove the lighter components and as a result are somewhat pre-weathered. As a result they are usually persistent floating pollutant problems. These oils can occasionally form a mousse, but usually only slowly, and after a period of days. Fuel Oil No. 6 and HFO may not spread into thin films and but rather break up into smaller patches and then tarballs. The resulting scattered tarballs are very difficult to observe using visual, or remote sensing techniques. This combined with the persistence of the tarballs makes of spills quite likely to result in long range, and occasionally unexpected, beach impacts. [SEP] Tidal Heights at SAVANNAH, Savannah River, GEORGIA Station No. 3187 Latitude: 32?? 5.00' N Longitude: 81?? 5.00' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water 00:00 Low Water 00:00 High water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Based on SAVANNAH (calculated from constituent data) From Tue Nov 27, 2007 to Thu Dec 06, 2007 (10 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Tue Nov 27, 2007; 10:24 am; 9.2ft Lowest Tide - Tue Nov 27, 2007; 04:28 am; -0.6ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 11/27/2007 04:28 -0.6 Low Tue 10:24 +9.2 High 17:10 +0.1 Low 22:54 +7.6 High ------------------------------------------------------- 11/28/2007 05:17 -0.2 Low Wed 11:22 +8.8 High 17:59 +0.4 Low 23:59 +7.4 High ------------------------------------------------------- 11/29/2007 06:08 +0.2 Low Thu 12:23 +8.4 High 18:49 +0.7 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 11/30/2007 01:03 +7.4 High Fri 07:02 +0.7 Low 13:20 +8.1 High 19:42 +0.9 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/01/2007 02:01 +7.4 High Sat 08:01 +1.1 Low 14:13 +7.9 High 20:38 +1.0 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/02/2007 02:54 +7.6 High Sun 09:03 +1.2 Low 15:02 +7.8 High 21:33 +1.0 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/03/2007 03:45 +7.8 High Mon 10:02 +1.2 Low 15:50 +7.7 High 22:23 +0.9 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/04/2007 04:35 +7.9 High Tue 10:57 +1.1 Low 16:38 +7.6 High 23:10 +0.7 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/05/2007 05:24 +8.1 High Wed 11:47 +0.9 Low 17:27 +7.6 High 23:55 +0.6 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/06/2007 06:12 +8.3 High Thu 12:34 +0.8 Low 18:14 +7.6 High [SEP] Map
Around 2030 on November 23, Sector Juneau reported that a 120 ft. houseboat, owned by Evergreen Timber was aground in Coon Cove in George Inlet.   The vessel was taking on water via a small hole in its hull.  6000 gallons of diesel were onboard but none had yet leaked into the environment.   Sector Juneau requested support from NOAA for a trajectory, weather and tidal information.  SPOT weather forecasts were provided by the Juneau NWS office, and NOAA Hazmat provided the remaining information.  The Coast Guard initially provided one dewatering pump and planned to provide additional pumps.   By the morning of November 24, five additional pumps had fully dewatered the vessel, causing it to float high enough to expose and patch the hole in the hull.  No fuel was released into the water and the Coast Guard declared the incident closed. [SEP] The Juneau weather service office report that the dominant winds in the area were southerly around 25 knots with gusts to 35 kts. This pattern would continue through Saturday with southerly winds becoming 10-20 knots. [SEP] After consultation with Glen Watabayashi at Seattle Hazmat, Sector Juneau was given the following trajectory for a possible leak of the diesel. If the leak was slow (most likely case) then the southerly winds would tend to pin the oil at the head of Coon Cove. Tidal currents are relatively weak (max of 1 knot) in the adjacent deep channel of George Inlet and would be even less in Coon Cove. An Ebb tide may move a very small portion of the diesel out into this deeper channel. [SEP] MER - EVERGREEN TIMBERS HOUSEBOAT SINKING - COON COVE, GEORGE INLET IC: SECTOR JUNEAU MISLE: 383550 WEATHER: Visibility 5 NM, Sea State Calm, Ceiling 2300 FT, Air 39 F, Sea N/A, Wind Calm SITUATION: 231915V Received notification of a houseboat owned by Evergreen Timber LLC taking on water in Coon Cove part of George Inlet. Houseboat is tied to the shore and grounded taking on water due to a large tidal flow. The vessel was listing on the starboard quarter and has approximately 6000 gallons of #2 diesel fuel oil on board. Station Ketchikan is on scene assisting with the dewatering operations. Fuel vents are on the port side of the vessel and have been plugged. UPDATE 0345V: Dewatering operations have been successful. Only minor sheening observed, likely from dewatering ops. Sector Juneau released CG47260. SeaPro contractor and MSD Ketchikan investigator are underway aboard the OSRV RUDYERD BAY to get containment boom to the area with an ETA of 0545V. A first light over flight by an Air Station Sitka HH-60 Medium Range Recovery Helicopter is planned. CASE PENDS. [SEP] The red star marks to location where the vessel was grounded. [SEP] The Coast Guard was able to get 5 additional dewatering pumps onto the vessel, which were able to completely dewater the vessel. The small crack in the hull was exposed when the vessel floated high and free. It was patched, the crew reboarded the vessel, and the Coast Guard ordered the vessel to transit to Ketchikan for a complete hull examination. Case ended. [SEP] Tidal height information
Sector St Petersburg contacted the HDO to request plume modeling for an anhydrous ammonia release.  SSC contacted the command center to request location, release volume and time and on scene weather.  Location of leak was later determined to be on the south end of the US Hwy 301 bridge over the Alafia R., east side.  NOAA assisted USCG to assess the hazards.  A teanager had drilled a 1/4-3/8" hole in a 6" diameter liquid ammonia pipeline.  Local authorities evacuated public from 1/4-1/2 radius toward the westsouthwest for about 40 hours. [SEP] Photo of repaired NH3 pipe at south end of bridge on east side looking north across river. Pipe is approx. 6 inches in diameter. A hole 1/4-3/8" diameter was drilled into the side of the pipe about 2' above the ground. Photo 18Dec07 by Jim Jeansonne, NOAA Hazmat. [SEP] Photo of Hwy 301 bridge and sidewalk directly over the NH3 pipe. View from south end of bridge on east side looking north across river. Photo 18Dec07 by Jim Jeansonne, NOAA Hazmat. [SEP] Some post incident information obtained during a Tampa Bay Port Spill Committee Mtg. The teenager took 2 days to drill through the approximately 1/4" thick steel wall of the pipeline using a cordless drill. He had to re-charge the battery overnight. When he broke through the pipe wall, the escaping liquid ammonia, which immediately turned to a cryogenic vapor cloud, burned him from neck to groin. The youth fell or jumped into the river, thereby probably saving his life by flushing away the ammonia and rewarming his skin (the water was relatively warm). He survived the incident, but his eventual fate is not known at this time. When the youth let go of the drill, the drill bit broke off in the hole, thus partially plugging it. This restricted the size of the opening and retarded the release of ammonia. Responders decided to allow the ammonia to continue to bleed off, rather than risk worker injuries. Responders apparently did not have specially designed insulated Level A suits to deal with the extremely cold ammonia gas cloud. Regular suits would become too brittle, crack, and leak. The total volume released is not known at this time. At the time of the incident, the pipeline was under repair, so the pressure was much lower than normal, 180-200psi, rather than the typical 400+psi. [SEP] Google Earth image showing leak location at Hwy 301 bridge over the lower Alafia R. [SEP] USCG Sector St Petersburg reported that the leaking pipeline had been successfully patched and have concluded the response. County representatives will continue to assess impacts to soil and water. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST: TAMPA BAY PIPELINE ANHYDROUS AMMONIA RELEASE, TAMPA FL 2100 EST, Monday Nov 12, 2007 Sunset (Nov 12) 1739 Sunrise (Nov 13) 0650 Sunset (Nov 13) 1738 36-Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are forecast to be NE at 3-4 mph, becoming calm by midnight. Tomorrow, NE winds at 3-4 mph are predicted in the morning, becoming N-NE at 5 mph in the early afternoon, and NE at 3 mph by evening. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through tomorrow, no precipitation is expected. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, clear skies are expected. Tomorrow, partly cloudy skies are forecast. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from daytime highs near 80 to overnight lows in the low 60s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday: NE winds at 7 mph are forecast, becoming N at 7 mph in the afternoon. Partly cloudy skies with no precipitation expected. Thursday: NW winds at 10 mph are predicted. Partly cloudy skies with no precipitation expected. [SEP] Map of incident location provided these coordinates are correct: latitude: 27 degrees 52' 6" N longitude: 82 degrees 19' 35" W [SEP] Google Earth oblique view of bridge and river looking west, downstream toward Tampa Bay. [SEP] Google Earth image of U.S. Hwy 301 bridge over Alafia R. Leak location was at the southeast side of the bridge. [SEP] RIVERVIEW - Officials in Hillsborough County are responding to a chemical spill or leak at the Alafia River. The spill is in the area of Balm-Riverview Road and U.S. Highway 301. A white cloud of gas is floating over the Alafia around the bridge. The bridge on U.S. 301 is closed, and homes on the north side of the river are being evacuated. An ammonia pipeline runs through that area, but there is no confirmation that the pipe is the source of the leak. [SEP] Photo of fire department using water hoses to knock down any remaining ammonia vapors after ammonia leak stopped. Photo taken from Hwy 301 looking north to bridge over the Alafia R. a Riverview, FL. Photo by Jim Jeansonne, NOAA, 10:30pm, 12 Nov 2007. [SEP] News photo Image is Hwy 301 Bridge with vapor cloud under it soon after it was discovered. Photo by Brian McKay, published in the St. Petersburg Times, Tampa Edition, 13 Nov07.
The NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Hampton Roads, VA, that the 207' cruise ship Spirit of Nantucket was aground in the Intracoastal Waterway 3 mi. from the Atlantic Ocean.  The ship is carrying 720 bbl diesel but there have been no breaches in tanks or hull.  However, a 1000' sheen is reported on the water.  Ship is taking on water.  The spill is suspected to have resulted from a hydraulic system casualty as the vessel lost steering and was intentionally grounded to prevent sinking. [SEP] During the morning hours of Saturday, November 10, after the USCG Sector Hampton Roads aproved of the vessel's salvage plan, the C/S Spirit of Nantucket was successfully refloated and towed to a local shipyard for repairs. It appears that the C/S Spirit of Nantucket while transitting the Inter Coastal Waterway (ICW) hit the remnants of a derelict submerged vessel which resulted in damage to the ruddder and the rupturing of the bilge tank which then allowed a mix of oily water to be discharged from the vessel and water to inundate the hull. Initially it was beleived that hydraulic fluid was spilled. USCG provided several pumps to remove water from the hull so that vessel could be refloated. Location of incident was 36 39.9 N and 76 03.68 W. Incident closed.
MSO Port Arthur reports a pipeline release 5 nm offshore between the Sabine River and Galveston, TX. Amount and product reported to be 750 bbl condensate crude, API 55. A sheen of undefined dimensions has been reported on the water. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR PIPELINE FAILURE...NOAA ORR NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LAKE CHARLES LA 300 PM CST FRI NOV 9 2007 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE. DISCUSSION...MOISTURE WILL CONTINUE TO INCREASE THROUGH THE WEEKEND...WITH A FEW SHOWERS POSSIBLE ACROSS THE COASTAL WATERS THIS AFTERNOON. SHOWERS WILL BE POSSIBLE AGAIN SATURDAY AFTERNOON THROUGH MUCH OF NEXT WEEK. TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........PARTLY CLOUDY (25-35 PERCENT). MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 71. MAX HUMIDITY........100 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....SOUTH WINDS 7 TO 9 MPH. WAVE HEIGHT.........3 FEET. SWELL HEIGHT........SOUTH SWELL 2 FEET. TIME (CST) 3PM 4PM 5PM 6PM 7PM 8PM 9PM 10P 11P MID 1AM 2AM SKY (%).........37 35 32 30 30 29 29 29 28 28 28 27 WEATHER COV.....ISO ISO ISO WEATHER TYPE....RW RW RW TEMP............75 75 74 72 71 71 70 70 70 69 69 69 RH..............78 80 85 90 93 93 97 97 97 100 100 100 EYE LVL WND DIR.S S S S S S S S S S S S EYE LVL WND SPD.7 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 9 9 8 8 EYE LVL WND GST.10 10 10 10 10 10 11 11 13 13 12 12 WAVE HEIGHT(FT).3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 WAVE DIRECTION..S S S S S S S S S S S S SWELL HEIGHT(FT)3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 SATURDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY SUNNY (40-50 PERCENT) THEN BECOMING MOSTLY CLOUDY (70-80 PERCENT). CHANCE OF SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS IN THE AFTERNOON. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 76. MIN HUMIDITY........76 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....SOUTHEAST WINDS 8 TO 12 MPH. WAVE HEIGHT.........3 FEET DECREASING TO 2 FEET UNTIL LATE AFTERNOON...THEN INCREASING TO 3 FEET LATE IN THE AFTERNOON. SWELL HEIGHT........SOUTH SWELL 3 FEET. SATURDAY NIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLOUDY (65-75 PERCENT) THEN BECOMING PARTLY CLOUDY (40-50 PERCENT). MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 73. MAX HUMIDITY........90 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....SOUTHEAST WINDS 10 TO 12 MPH. WAVE HEIGHT.........3 FEET DECREASING TO 2 FEET AFTER MIDNIGHT. SWELL HEIGHT........SOUTH SWELL 3 FEET. FORECAST DAYS 3 THROUGH 5... VETERANS DAY... MOSTLY CLOUDY. LOWS IN THE MID 70S. HIGHS IN THE MID 70S. SOUTHEAST WINDS AROUND 12 MPH. MONDAY... MOSTLY CLOUDY. CHANCE OF SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS. LOWS IN THE LOWER 70S. HIGHS IN THE MID 70S. SOUTHEAST WINDS AROUND 15 MPH. TUESDAY... MOSTLY CLOUDY WITH CHANCE OF SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS. LOWS IN THE LOWER 70S. HIGHS IN THE MID 70S. SOUTHEAST WINDS AROUND 14 MPH. [SEP] TO: NOAA SSC Mary Barbor Monday, February 1, 2008 1130 CST FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 (206) 526-4911 SUBJECT: Weather forecast for proposed pigging operation for a damaged pipeline on Sabine Bank. Likely location of release: 29??35.21'N-094??09.47'W. Possible spill amount: up to 3500 bbls of a light condensate. The Coast Guard has asked for a forecast to determine when operations might best be completed -- Northerly winds and seas less than 3 feet are desired. The current plan is to began pressurizing the pipeline with sea-water today, around 1800-1900. The oil will not be under pressure for another 15 to 17 hours after that (midmorning on Saturday), so if there's a new leak threat it would occur after that time. The following is a site-specific forecast developed by the National Weather Service specifically for this incident. DISCUSSION: -------------------------------- The conditions look good for the operation today, with moderate winds expected to be from the North, swinging around to the East in the afternoon. However, the winds are expected to shift to be from the Southeast Saturday, when it's most likely that a leakage may occur. The winds will still be moderate, but the Southeasterly direction will tend to move any released oil toward shore, where it may impact the shoreline before evaporating and dispersing. Long term outlook: The long term forecast indicates possible windows next week, with light Northerly winds forecast for Wednesday and Friday. SUNRISE/SUNSET -------------------------------- Friday, Feb 1: Sunset 5:49 p.m. Saturday, Feb 2: Sunrise 7:03 a.m. Sunset 5:50 p.m. WARNINGS: ---------------------------------- Small craft advisory remains in effect through Friday morning. WIND AND PRECIPITATION: ---------------------------------- Today: North winds 10 to 15 knots becoming East around 5 to 10 knots in the afternoon. Tonight: Southeast winds 10 to 15 knots. Saturday: Southeast winds 10 to 15 knots. Saturday night: Southeast winds 10 to 15 knots. A slight chance of showers. Sunday: South winds 15 to 20 knots. A chance of showers and thunderstorms. Monday: South winds around 20 knots. A chance of showers and thunderstorms. Tuesday: Northwest winds around 25 knots. A chance of showers and thunderstorms. Extended Outlook: Light winds from the North Wednesday, shifting the Southeast Thursday, then back to light winds from the North Friday. WAVE CONDITIONS: ---------------------------------- Friday: Seas 3 to 5 feet subsiding to 2 to 3 feet in the afternoon. Coastal lakes and bays light chop decreasing to smooth in the afternoon. Friday night: Seas 2 feet. Coastal lakes and bays light chop. Saturday: Seas 3 feet. Coastal lakes and bays light chop. Saturday night: Seas 3 feet. Coastal lakes and bays light chop. Sunday: Seas 3 to 4 feet. Coastal lakes and bays choppy. Monday: Seas 4 to 5 feet. Coastal lakes and bays rough. Tuesday: Seas 5 to 6 feet. Coastal lakes and bays rough. A chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] TIME: 1600 CST, Thursday, Jan. 24, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Sabine Bank Pipeline Operations For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a accidental release from operations on a damaged pipline off Sabine, Bank, TX. This analysis is for up to 7000 barrels of light condensate crude oil be accidentally released during operations from the platform located at 29??31.94'N, 94??07.83'W This weekend. This value is the worst-case release volume for the oil remaining in the line. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: The forecast calls for Northeast winds around 15 knots Friday and Saturday, shifting to the East on Sunday. 2) TRAJECTORY: The TABS buoy system indicates a downcoast current of approximately 1/2 knot. Given the easterly component of the forecast winds, we expect that to continue through the weekend. If there is a release on Friday or Saturday, we expect the released oil to move more or less parallel to shore in the downcoast direction at about one knot. A visible sheen would be expected about half way to Galveston Bay entrance, before spreading thin and evaporating and dispersing. Little shoreline contact is expected unless there is a stronger Easterly or Southerly component of the wind than expected. If there is a release on Sunday, the expected Easterly winds could push the oil more towards shore, perhaps resulting in some small impacts to the shoreline between the spill location and Galveston Bay entrance. 3) OIL FATE: The oil is a light condensate crude, API 55. Observations from the previous releases from this same pipeline indicate that it rapidly spreads out into a very thin film (light sheen) that is difficult to recover. Even if a large quantity is released (several 100 bbls), we expect that a surface slick would last less than 24 hours in the forecast conditions. Sheens may persist longer. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR PIPELINE FAILURE...NOAA ORR NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LAKE CHARLES LA 455 AM CST SAT NOV 10 2007 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE. DISCUSSION...SCATTERED SHOWERS WILL BE POSSIBLE THIS AFTERNOON AS A WEAK UPPER LEVEL DISTURBANCE MOVES OVER THE AREA. A BETTER CHANCE FOR RAIN IS EXPECTED ON MONDAY AS A STRONGER SYSTEM MOVES ACROSS THE AREA. HUMIDITIES WILL REMAIN HIGH THROUGH THE WEEKEND AND WINDS WILL BE VARIABLE AND GUSTY IN AND NEAR SHOWERS THIS AFTERNOON. TODAY... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY SUNNY (45-55 PERCENT). SLIGHT CHANCE OF SHOWERS. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 75. MIN HUMIDITY........81 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....LIGHT WINDS BECOMING SOUTH 5 TO 7 MPH IN THE AFTERNOON. WAVE HEIGHT.........3 FEET DECREASING TO 2 FEET UNTIL LATE AFTERNOON...THEN INCREASING TO 3 FEET LATE IN THE AFTERNOON. SWELL HEIGHT........SOUTH SWELL 3 FEET. TIME (CST) 6AM 7AM 8AM 9AM 10A 11A 12P 1PM 2PM 3PM 4PM 5PM SKY (%).........45 46 48 50 52 54 55 55 53 51 50 48 WEATHER COV.....SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH WEATHER TYPE....RW RW RW RW RW RW RW RW RW RW RW RW TEMP............71 71 72 73 73 74 74 75 75 75 74 73 RH..............93 93 91 89 87 85 84 82 81 81 81 83 EYE LVL WND DIR.S S SE SE SE SE SE SE SE S S S EYE LVL WND SPD.2 2
A DISCHARGE OF OIL FROM A PIPELINE WAS REPORTED TO OR&R EMERGENCY RESPONSE DIVISION AT APPROX. 2315HRS 23 OCT 2007.  PRP CALCULATED A LOSS OF 138 BARRELS BUT CANNOT FIND THE ACTUAL SOURCE OF THE LEAK.  THE PIPELINE HAS BEEN SHUT DOWN.  USCG REPORTED ON THE MORNING OF 24 OCT THAT THE SOURCE IS A "PINHOLE" LEAK IN THE PIPELINE IN 1 FOOT OF WATER.  AN OVERFLIGHT WAS CONDUCTED THIS MORNING AND AN OIL SLICK HAS BEEN OBSERVED TO BE APPROXIMATELY 2-3NM BY 200YDS IN SIZE AND SOUTHEAST OF THE SOURCE.  LOCATION IS BETWEEN HIGH ISLAND AND SABINE PASS (029deg37.40N, 094deg11.81W). [SEP] Date; Oct 24, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry / USCG Cory McDougal FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Sterling Exploration Pipeline Discharge FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A pin hole leak from a pipeline has resulted in a 2 - 3 mile by 200 yards wide sheen. The sheen's location from an overflight this morning at 0815 CDT was reported to be 29?? 37.3'N by 094?? 11.8' W to 29?? 36.5'N by 094?? 07.4' W. The source location is at 29?? 37.4'N by 094?? 11.81' W. This is within 1 nm of shore. CG estimates the sheen is about 300 gallons of a light crude. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Offshore winds are predicted through the weekend. Seas 2-3 feet becoming 4-5 feet this afternoon. 2) Trajectory Analysis No shoreline impacts expected over the next few days with the offshore winds. We would expect the movement of the sheen to be dominated by the winds and move offshore with the N to NW winds. If the volume of oil lost is in the hundreds of gallons, we would not expect any shoreline impacts to occur. If the volume should increase to 10,000 gallons or or more, then enough oil could persist long enough to have tarballs impact the shoreline with possible wind changes next week. Currently the TABS buoys along the Texas coast indicate a coastal current that is flowing from Mexico toward Louisiana. This along with the NW winds would put the Western Louisiana coastline at risk if a enough oil should be spilled to persist into next week. 3) Oil Fate At this time we do not have the name of the product. However, we would not expect a light crude oil spill of several hundred gallons to persist for more than a few days with seas 2 - 3 feet, increasing to 4 - 5 feet. [SEP] A photograph from a series of photographs taken by the USCG Pollution Investigation Team on 24 Oct. 2007. All photographs are from the beach very near the spill site and show small patches of oil on the beach, the containment boom, and cleanup workers (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] A photograph from a series of photographs taken by the USCG Pollution Investigation Team on 24 Oct. 2007. All photographs are from the beach very near the spill site and show small patches of oil on the beach, the containment boom, and cleanup workers (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] STERLING EXPLORATION PIPELINE DISCHARGE, JEFFERSON CO., TX 1145 EDT, Thursday October 24, 2007 Sunset (10/24): 1840 Sunrise (10/25): 0727 Sunset (10/25): 1839 SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY REMAINS IN EFFECT FROM 4 PM CDT THIS AFTERNOON THROUGH THURSDAY MORNING ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, NW winds 15-20 knots. Tonight, N winds 20 knots. Thursday, NW winds 15-20 knots becoming to 10-15 knots in the afternoon. _________________________ Waves: Today, 2-3 feet. Tonight, 4-5 feet. Thursday, 4-5 feet becoming to 2-3 feet in the afternoon. _________________________________ Precipitation: Today, no precipitation expected. Tonight, no precipitation expected. Thursday, no precipitation expected. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy. Tonight, partly cloudy. Thursday, mostly sunny. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs near 70 to lows in the upper 40's. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, NE winds 10-15 knots. Seas 2-3 feet. Coastal lakes and bays light chop. Saturday, NE winds 15-20 knots. Seas 3-4 feet. Coastal lakes and bays light chop. Sunday, NE winds 20 knots. Seas 5-6 feet. Coastal lakes and bays light chop. [SEP] The USCG reports that a small amount of oil was found on the shoreline during a SCAT survey on 24 Oct. The pipeline leak, which is very near the shoreline (40 feet) is being repaired at present. The sheen observed yesterday was expected to remain offshore and dissipate naturally (it was estimated as only a few hundred gallons). Potential for additional shoreline impact is low. Unfortunately, no overflight was available today to confirm the fate of the slick observed the day before. Additional information to follow. [SEP] A photograph from a series of photographs taken by the USCG Pollution Investigation Team on 24 Oct. 2007. All photographs are from the beach very near the spill site and show small patches of oil on the beach, the containment boom, and cleanup workers (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] At 0130 hrs on 24 October 2007, the NOAA HAZMAT Duty Officer (HDO) on call relayed a request from USCG Port Arthur to provide trajectory support for an overflight to investigate a reported pipeline leak. The report included an estimate that maybe 100 bbls of oil was lost. The reported position placed the suspected source of the spill just off-shore the beach and east of Sabine Pass. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) investigated the trajectory implications and provided the USCG a verbal assessment of the area that morning overflight should concentrate. At the time, the winds were blowing offshore from the NW. The overflight on 24 October showed a slick some 2 miles long originating from the reported source location. It was estimated that slick was approximately 300 gallons of sheen. NOAA provided a follow up trajectory analysis (see earlier reports). No overflight was available to follow the slick the following day, but it was expected to remain offshore and dissipate naturally. A USCG pollution response team conducted a follow up beach survey on 24 October and did identify some light shoreline oiling immediately near the source location. A pollution cleanup contractor had already isolated the leak source. On 25 October, the source was secured using a clamp. From a response prospective, this entry will constitute the ResponseLink Final Report. [SEP] A photograph from a series of photographs taken by the USCG Pollution Investigation Team on 24 Oct. 2007. All photographs are from the beach very near the spill site and show small patches of oil on the beach, the containment boom, and cleanup workers (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] A photograph from a series of photographs taken by the USCG Pollution Investigation Team on 24 Oct. 2007. All photographs are from the beach very near the spill site and show small patches of oil on the beach, the containment boom, and cleanup workers (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] A photograph from a series of photographs taken by the USCG Pollution Investigation Team on 24 Oct. 2007. All photographs are from the beach very near the spill site and show small patches of oil on the beach, the containment boom, and cleanup workers (photo credit, USCG).
At approximately 0750 local time, the 57-ft F/V Karen , a commercial scallop fishing vessel, was caught in currents and grounded in Oyster Creek Channel, Barnegat Inlet NJ.  No product has been released, but the vessel is on its starboard side and is carrying 2500 gal. of diesel.  Salvage team is aboard and awaiting Coast Guard approval to proceed.  Coast Guard has requested trajectory information from NOAA/ERD as guidance [SEP] ADIOS table [SEP] Date; Oct 11, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Frank Csulak / USCG Chief James Converse FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: F/V Karen L grounded at Barnegat Inlet FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: At approximately 0750 local time, the 57-ft F/V Karen L was caught in currents and grounded in Oyster Creek Channel, Barnegat Inlet NJ. No product has been released, but the vessel is on its starboard side and is carrying 2500 gal. of diesel. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Tonight: Winds from W at 10 - 15 knots increasing to 25. 4 - 6 foot seas. Friday: Winds from W 20 - 25 knots. 4 - 7 foot seas. Friday Night: NW winds 15 - 20 knots. Seas 2 - 4 feet. 2) Trajectory Analysis If the vessel loses oil from outside of the surf zone, we would not expect any shoreline impacts due to the offshore winds and limited persistence of the diesel. If the vessel loses oil from inside of the surf zone, there could be scattered beach staining within 1/4 mile of the vessel. A visible sheen under 10 knot winds would extend from 1/2 - 1 mile. A visible sheen under 20 knot winds would extend from 1/4 - 1/2 mile. 3) Oil Fate 10 KNOT WINDS Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (CANADA) API = 39.4 Pour Point = -22 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 mph Wave Height = 5 ft Water Temperature = 70 deg F Time of Initial Release = October 11, 1800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining  Spill gal percent percent percent 1 2,500 - 21 - 7 - 72 2 2,500 38 23 40 3 2,500 - 45 - 37 - 18 4 2,500  48 45 8 15 KNOT WINDS Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (CANADA) API = 39.4 Pour Point = -22 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 mph Wave Height = 5 ft Water Temperature = 70 deg F Time of Initial Release = October 11, 1800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining  Spill gal percent percent percent 1 2,500 - 26 - 9 - 66 2 2,500 44 24 32 3 2,500 - 50 - 37 - 13 4 2,500  52 43 6 20 KNOT WINDS Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (CANADA) API = 39.4 Pour Point = -22 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 20 mph Wave Height = 5 ft Water Temperature = 70 deg F Time of Initial Release = October 11, 1800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining  Spill gal percent percent percent 1 2,500 - 30 - 11 - 60 2 2,500 48 26 26 3 2,500 - 53 - 37 - 10 30 KNOT WINDS Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (CANADA) API = 39.4 Pour Point = -22 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 30 mph Wave Height = 5 ft Water Temperature = 70 deg F Time of Initial Release = October 11, 1800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining  Spill gal percent percent percent 1 2,500 - 36 - 13 - 51 2 2,500 53 28 18 3 2,500 - 57 - 36 - 7 [SEP] As of today, 10/12/07. There has not been any oil released to the water. The boat remaines on its side in about 5-20 feet of water in the inlet as a formal salvage plan is being prepared. Once the plan has been reviewed and approved by the USCG and NJDEP, equipment will be staged on-scene. At this time salvage operations are tentatively scheduled for Monday, 10/15. Both the USCG and salvage company have vessels and response personnel on-scene. There has been no further request for assistance from NOAA. Hotline will remain open until removal operations are concluded and there is not threat of a release. [SEP] The USCG Sector Delaware Bay reports that vessle salvage operations were unsuccessful due to the shallow water. Salvor will be bringing in another barge to attempt salvage. There were reports of light sheens in the area, but no recoverable oil. [SEP] On October 14th, the Karen L was refloated and towed to nearby shipyard for repairs. No oil was spilled during event. [SEP] http://www.app.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20071012/NEWS02/710120454
On the morning of October 5 Tank Barge OB6, operated by Delta Western, grounded in the lower Ugashik River three miles southeast from Smokey Pt. OB6 currently has 5,868 gallons of unleaded gasoline and 5,882 gallons of #2 diesel in its tanks. Attempts to refloat will commence on next high tide. If successful, OB6 intends to anchor in Ugashik River. Current wx conditions: West winds 35kts, overcast, 10kt vis. [SEP] The grounded barge OB6 was successfully refloated during last night's high tide. No pollution occurred and no holes in the barge were detected. Barge is securely anchored now in Ugashik Bay waiting for a better towing line and better weather to procede on its mission of delivering fuel to more villages in SW Alaska. Case Closed. [SEP] Sector Anchorage Command Center reported that the barge refloating effort late last night (Oct. 5) was unsuccessful. Apparently the seas were too choppy to be able to successfully conduct the operation. It was noted, however, that there seemed to be adequate water at high tide, and another effort will be made on the higher high tide late this evening to refloat the barge. The barge is steel construction and no reports of any petroleum leakage have occurred. [SEP] Today at 0600 the barge OB6, operated by Delta Western, broke free from its tow and grounded on a sandy/muddy beach near Pilot Point in Ugashik Bay. The barge is port side to the beach with 5,868 gallons of unleaded and 5,882 gallons of diesel #2 in the starboard tanks. All other tanks are empty. The tug Noatak and crew are safe and anchored about 1 mile from the barge in Dago Creek. There has been no report of a discharge as of now. Further details on the integrity of the hull will be reported after a visual inspection is conducted later today. Current weather is high winds 40 - 50 knots expected to diminish throughout the day. Periodic weather updates will be communicated to us throughout the day. The plan is to retrieve the barge from the beach between 2000 and 2100, weather permitting. The Delta Western VP of operations for Western Alaska has informed me that he will be making an NRC report for a potential discharge, which is justified since the barge now sits in a State critical habitat area. Our reports indicate that high tide could be between 2100 and 2234, and between 13.1 and 19.5 ft. At the time of the grounding the tides were between 8 and 10 ft. All this will be communicated to the on-scene incident commander. [SEP] SHIO was run and provided to the Coast Guard. It showed that the next high tide would be at 2000 on Oct. 5.  The NWS Anchorage was also contacted. They provided the following forecast which was provided to the Coast Guard. To: Sector Anchorage Coast Guard From: John Whitney, NOAA SSC Subject: Weather forecast for Ugashik Bay Date: Oct. 15, 2007 The barge OB6 is currently aground on the beach just north of Pilot Point in Ugashik Bay. Reports from on scene indicate that the barge is on a gently sloping sand and mud beach. Its tow vessel, M/V Noatak, is currently anchored and standing by in hopes of pulling the barge from its grounding at high tide this evening, which occurs at approximately 10 pm. Weather on-scene is 40 to 50 knots. Current Weather and Forecast from NWS Anchorage office: Oct. 5, Friday morning: W. winds at 45 kts with gusts to 55 kts.  Friday evening and night: Winds diminishing to 30 kts from the WNW Oct. 6, Saturday: Winds NW, 30-35 kts throughout the day Saturday night: Winds NNW at 20 kts Oct. 7, Sunday: Winds NNW 20-25 kts.
The sailboat, Sweet Dreams, ran aground in Masonboro Inlet, adjacent to Wrightsville Beach, NC at approximately 2300 hours on 9/3/07.  USCG Wilmington, NC notified NOAA SSC at approximately 0930 hours on 9/4/07. It was reported to the SSC that the vessel sank and broke apart.  Approximately 375 gallons of #2 fuel oil was on board the vessel when she ran aground. Due to warm ocean temperatures in the mid-80's F. and warm air temps in the 90's F, most if not 100% of the fuel oil would be expected to evaporate and dissipate within 24 hours or less from the time of the incident.  Vessel owner hired salvage company to inspect vessel. Salvagers confirmed that fuel tank breached and empty. No reports of product observed in water or on shoreline. [SEP] Map of sinking [SEP] idal Heights at Masonboro Inlet, outer coast, NORTH CAROLINA Station No. 2625 Latitude: 34?? 11.00' N Longitude: 77?? 49.00' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water +00:23 Low Water +00:22 High water height difference: (*1.24+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.17+0.0) Based on CAPE HATTERAS FISHING PIER (calculated from constituent data) From Mon Sep 03, 2007 to Thu Sep 06, 2007 (4 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Highest Tide - Mon Sep 03, 2007; 01:18 pm; 4.8ft Lowest Tide - Mon Sep 03, 2007; 06:34 am; 0.0ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 09/03/2007 00:31 +3.6 High Mon 06:34 +0.0 Low 13:18 +4.8 High 19:50 +0.6 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 09/04/2007 01:33 +3.4 High Tue 07:35 +0.2 Low 14:26 +4.7 High 21:03 +0.7 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 09/05/2007 02:44 +3.2 High Wed 08:43 +0.4 Low 15:37 +4.6 High 22:15 +0.8 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 09/06/2007 03:58 +3.2 High Thu 09:55 +0.4 Low 16:44 +4.6 High 23:18 +0.7 Low
Starting on August 30th,2007, USCG Sector San Juan began receiving various reports of tarballs and oil slicks in the area of Guanico-Bahia de Guayanilla, Puerto Rico. One oil slick was reported at 0900 local time at Lat/Lon N 17deg 55.95', W 066deg 50.63' as 1 mile offshore. Other various sightings offshore of the southern coast of PR were subsequently reported. Tarballs were reported on beaches as early as 1030 local time the same day. USCG requested a NOAA SSC to respond on-scene to provide scientific support. [SEP] Watermaked photo by Kevin Kirsch, NOAA ARD. [SEP] photo by NOAA [SEP] Unknown location and time [SEP] tilled to depth of 6 inches-not deep enough. photo by NOAA [SEP] photo by NOAA [SEP] Created by NOAA [SEP] photo by NOAA [SEP] 9/24/07 photo by NOAA [SEP] Situation Cleaning in sector 4 continued today. Surfwashing on Majagua Beach was started to remove buried oil. This operation was effective and the sorbent booms did a good job recovering the released oil. Snare did not seem to be as effective for this oil. Surfwashing will continue tomorrow until no more buried oil is found on Majagua. To the east along Pta Verraca workers continued to remove oiled wrack from the fringing mangroves. The majority of this will be completed tomorrow with only small rocky pockets along the northern end of Pta Verraca to be addressed the following day. USCG found heavily oiled mangroves in La Pargara today. The oil was extremely viscous and was estimated to be 1 to 3 inches thick in and area of about 100 sq yards. Tomorrow a team consisting of NOAA, USFWS, EQB and contractors will revisit this area by boat to more fully assess the impact and assess possible cleanup methodologies. Two other teams led by USCG will survey shoreline to the east and west to see if other areas of oiled mangroves exist. These areas were not visible from overflights due to the heavy foliage associated with the mangroves. USCG plans to move the command post to La Pargara tomorrow. SSC; B Benggio [SEP] from SCAT survey photo by NOAA [SEP] USCG Overflight photo-7, 30Aug07 [SEP] USCG Overflight photo-11, 30Aug07
Sector San Diego contacted the NOAA SSC on 21AUG2007 regarding two mystery sheens observed offshore from San Diego, CA.  The first sheen was observed at 1400hrs on 20AUG, 25-30nm off the mainland and was described as a "thin" sheen covering 3x3nm and centered at 32deg 37'18"N, 118deg 38' 48"W.  The second sheen was observed at 1400hrs on 21AUG, approximately 15 SW of San Clemente Island and was described as a "dark" sheen with a strong odor covering 2x6.6nm running roughly parallel to shore and centered on 32deg 46' 00"N, 117deg 49' 00"W.  On 22AUG, two more sheen reports were made at 1300 and 1500hrs.  And on 24AUG, two more sheen reports were made at 0630 and 1005hrs. [SEP] Date: 1230 PDT August 22, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout  FROM: NOAA/NOS Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Offshore mystery sheens, San Diego, CA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of a observed offshore sheens. These notes are based on the following information: Two mystery sheens were reported as follows: August 20 at 1400 PDT, 3nm x 3 nm, center at 32 deg 37' 18"N, 118 deg 38' 48" W. August 21 at 1400 PDT, 2nm x 6.6 nm, center at 32 deg 46'N, 117 deg 49' W. Both If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ Trajectory NOAA National Data Buoy Center station 46086 shows winds over the last 48 hours with a consistent westerly component with speeds in the 5-15 knot range. HF Radar from Southern California Coastal Ocean Observing Systems (SCCOOS) shows surface currents in the area with a southerly component on the order of 0.4 knots. Concerns regarding these sheens passing into Mexican territorial waters: The first sheen (August 20 1400) could take 2-3 days, so this sheen may be crossing into Mexican territorial waters today. The second (August 21 1400) could take 12 hours, indicating this sheen may have crossed into Mexican territorial waters overnight. [SEP] Sector San Diego requested a synopsis of NOAA support for the series of mystery sheens during the week of 20AUG07 for use during this morning's Command Staff briefing. The requested synopsis is attached. JStout, SSC [SEP] (Printable pdf attached) Date: 1030 PDT August 25, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout  FROM: NOAA/NOS Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Offshore mystery sheens, San Diego, CA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of observed offshore sheens. These notes are based on the following information: A fourth mystery sheen was visualized twice yesterday: August 24 at 0630 PDT, 2 nm x 3 nm oriented with the major axis north/south, center at 32 deg 38.5' N, 118 deg 23.5' W. August 24 at 1005 PDT, 2 nm x 4 nm oriented with the major axis at 070 deg, center at 32 deg 42.13' N, 118 deg 29.36' W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 2) Hindcast Trajectory USCG has requested an estimate of where this sheen could have come from. The area offshore of San Clemente Island does not have good HF radar coverage, so wind and current histories are from NOAA National Data Buoy Center station 46806. We have added a larger uncertainty factor due to the currents in the hindcast search area calculations, because this buoy is distant from the area where the sheens were spotted, Based on the sighting yesterday at 1510 hours: 24 hours earlier (August 23 0800 hrs), the sheen could have been in an area centered about 14 nm SSE of San Clement Island at 32 deg 36.6' N, 118 deg 21.08' W. Highest probability search area is 4 nm x 12 nm oriented with the major axis NW to SE; the lower probability search area is 5 nm x 21 nm with the same orientation and center point. 48 hours earlier (August 22 0800 hrs), the sheen could have been in an area centered about 20 nm SSE of San Clement Island at 32 deg 33.11' N, 118 deg 16.58' W. Highest probability search area is 5.5 nm x 14 nm oriented with the major axis NW to SE; the lower probability search area is 15 nm x 30 nm with the same orientation and center point. [SEP] LT Ku, To follow-up on our telephone conversation earlier this evening, I provide the following answers to several questions that I posed to one of my oceanographers. If any of the initial sheen information is incorrect, please let me know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. The two sheens in question: August 20 at 1400 PDT, 3nm x 3 nm, center at 32 deg 37' 18"N, 118 deg 38' 48" W. August 21 at 1400 PDT, 2nm x 6.6 nm, center at 32 deg 46'N, 117 deg 49' W. Both sheens are quite far offshore. Q1. Might these sheens be related? A1. There is a possibility that these sheens are related, but proving so would be difficult. We do not expect these to be the same sheen visualized twice. With wind conditions showing winds greater than 10 knots sheens on the water are unlikely to stay together for very long. Q2. What is the potential for shoreline impacts? A2. From such a long distance offshore, we would not expect these sheens to remain coherent long enough to reach the shoreline. Q3. How much are these sheens a threat to Mexican Waters. A3. With winds from the WNW-W, and the summer currents to the south, there is a very small possibility these sheens could reach Mexican territorial waters. We do not expect these sheens to contact any shorelines. Despite the small possiblity of reaching Mexican waters, we will attempt to provide you with an estimate tomorrow of how long it might take for oil to transit that distance given the conditions on-scene. Also, based on discussions with LT Altendorf this evening, we will also provide a hindcast estimate in order to assist your investigations into possible sources. Jordan Stout NOAA SSC [SEP] A summary chart of reported sheen locations during the week of 20AUG07. Date & time of reports to Sector San Diego are given for each location. Color-coding is based on when NOAA ERD was provided with the information. For instance, the first two sheen reports were provided to NOAA on 22AUG, though they spanned two days' time. JStout, SSC [SEP] Date: 1530 PDT August 22, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout  FROM: NOAA/NOS Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Offshore mystery sheens, San Diego, CA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of observed offshore sheens. These notes are based on the following information: A third mystery sheen was visualized twice today: August 22 at 1300 PDT, 2nm x 2nm, center at 33 deg 13'N, 118 deg 19' W. August 22 at 1510 PDT, 4500 yds x 1200 yds, center at 33 deg 13.18'N, 118 deg 20.58'W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) Weather NOAA National Data Buoy Center station 46086 currently shows winds from the WSW at less than 8 knots. Winds are forecast to be from the SE at 5-10 knots tonight through Thursday midday. Thursday afternoon winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 knots. Thursday night winds are predicted to be from the SE at 5-10 knots. Friday morning winds are forecast to be from the SW at 10 knots. 2) Trajectory With such light winds, a sheen could persist for several days. HF Radar from Southern California Coastal Ocean Observing Systems (SCCOOS) shows surface currents in the area south of Catalina Island flowing downcoast at about 1/3 knot. The sheen's movement due to the wind (3% of 10 knots = .3 knots) with a component from the south, and currents (est. 0.33 knots) going to the south are about equal in magnitude. We do not expect the sheen to move very far, but may move around due the varying components of wind direction. For the overflight tomorrow morning, we suggest looking 3 nm in all directions from the 1500 hr sighting today, including the south side of Catalina Island.
MSD Ketchikan reported to Alaska SSC (at 0900 ADT, Aug. 18) that the 58' F/V Aldebaran sank at 0116 ADT, Sat., August 18, on the west side of Bold Island at 55-14.63N, 131-26.25W, in 75-80 fathoms of water.  Vessel had 800 gallons of #2 diesel and 50 gallons of hydraulic fluid on board.   Vents were successfully pluged prior to vessel sinking, however; fuel began surfacing from the sunken vessel.   A Coast Guard overflight on late Saturday morning revealed a silvery to rainbow sheen extending 3-4 miles NW of the capsizing site.    A subsequent overflight on Monday morning, Aug. 20, showed a dramatically reduced amount of fuel surfacing from the sunken vessel. [SEP] Photo showing surfacing oil from sunken vessel [SEP] SHIO tidal current curve for area of spill [SEP] After the Monday overflight, the Coast Guard's comments were, "It looks like the amount of sheen has been greatly reduced to a light silvery sheen and is not coming up from the vessel as much as it was on Saturday." [SEP] Locaton map [SEP] Silvery sheen at southern Bold Island. Photo taken Mon.,Aug.20, late morning [SEP] Photo showing rainbow and silver sheen from F/V Aldebaran [SEP] Coast Guard aircraft overflew the site of the sinking of the F/V Aldebaran from 1100 to 1200 on Saturday, August18. Oil was surfacing from the vessel capsizing location, and a silver and rainbow sheen extended 5 miles NW to Mountain Point which is the southern-most tip of Revillagigedo Island, and the Coast Guard requested a trajectory where the oil would go next. Image associated with this report shows corrected position of vessel capsizing and location of Mountain Point. Ketchikan is located a couple miles NW from the upper left hand corner of the chart. [SEP] Communication with the Coast Guard at MSD Ketchikan on Wednesday morning, Aug. 22, indicated that there would be no further overflights due to the dramatically reduced amount of oil surfacing in the Monday overflight. With the vessel at 79 fathoms, there is nothing that can be done with the remaining fuel on board. Hence they are closing the case and will only monitor it on overflights of opportunity.
On Monday, 7 August 2007, the USCG Marine Safety Unit Morgan City notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of small spill in the Atchafalya Basin. The release was from a 2 inch flow line near the Meterhouse Canal that flows into Bateman Lake. Since the initial notification, NOAA has provided additional support; therefore, a new hotline report was generated to track NOAA's continuing response activities. [SEP] The USCG and the Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinators Office (LOSCO) conducted a site visit on 9 August. Numerous species of birds were observed in the open lake to the east, adjacent to the impacted area. The majority were clapper rails, egrets and herons. Approximate impact area was estimated at 5 acres. Numerous dead cypress trees were observed within the impact area. Heavy foot traffic was also observed within the impact area. Attached is also a revised map and photos. The above observations were provided by LOSCO. In addition, the USCG reported that the primary oil recovery was being conducted using rope skimming system. An estimated 219 bbls of total fluids (oil and water) had been recovered as of 9 Aug. Foot traffic impacts should be reduced by using board walkways in the heavy traffic areas. The RP's spill management team and the USCG report coordination with USFWS. In addition, the RP's spill management team reported the following planned activities: The sheen size is 300 X 300 feet with 100% covered, and is black in appearance. There is thick vegetation (elephant ears) inside of the sheen area. The sheen is contained by 10" containment boom. This area is Zone 3. The rest of the 5 acres of contamination is in a wooded area. This area is divided into Zones 1 & 2. The planned response actions include recovery using sorbent booms, sorbent pads. The small pond in the wooded area will be remediated using rope mop skimmers. The released oil in the lower lake area will be remediated using a backhoe airboat. The recovered materials will placed into a roll of box to be transported for disposal. [SEP] On Monday, 7 August 2007, the USCG Marine Safety Unit Morgan City notified the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of small spill in the Atchafalya Basin. The release was from a 2 inch flow line near Meterhouse Canal that flows into Bateman Lake, and was reported to have been initial detected on 4 August. The initial reported suggested a small spill that was largely contained. Since the initial notification, NOAA has provided additional support; therefore, a new hotline report was generated to track NOAA's response activities. Bateman Island is due south of Morgan City between the Atchafalaya River and Avoca Island Cutoff canal. The flow line is reported to have failed (ruptured) spilling oil into Meterhouse Canal and adjacent and possibly into Bateman Lake. The estimated volume is maybe 200 bbls or more, but a true spill volume is unknown. The reported coordinates were 29?? 38' 50" N Lat. 91?? 14' 20" W Long. Bateman Island is due south of Morgan City between the Atchafalaya River and Avoca Island Cutoff canal. The area impacted is marshland and forested wetland. A RAR has been generated. The USCG Pollution Investigation Team saw patches of emulsified oil, sheening, and small pockets of brown oil on both land and in marsh areas. Water is very shallow and cleanup will be labor intensive, much like the previous Duck Lake Incident. The SSC met with the USCG at their office in Morgan City to discuss the response and future response activities. Samples were taken on 10 August and submitted to the LSU laboratory for analysis on 11 August. Results are expected today. The SSC is planning to visit the site once the gross oil recovery is near completion to discuss final cleanup activities and any follow up assessments. [SEP] Site photograph on 7 August 2007, photo credit USCG. [SEP] Reported location plotted by LOSCO (Map credit, LOSCO). [SEP] Site photograph on 7 August 2007, photo credit USCG. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
A mystery "diesel" spill off the coast of Neah Bay, WA, was first reported yesterday, August 4th, at 11:40 AM.  At 3:12 PM, a cruise ship in the area did not detect a spill.  Today at 4:30 PM a USCG vessel reported oil ½ nm x 75 yards located about 600 yards off the west side of Neah Bay.  Coordinates were provided as follows:North extent:     48 deg 23.01'N, 124 deg 44.51'WMiddle:     48 deg 23.25'N, 124 deg 44.13'WSouth:    48 deg 22.60'N, 124 deg 44.50'WFog has prevented the USCG from flying over the area of the reported spill to make observations.  An overflight will be conducted as soon as weather conditions permit. [SEP] Verbal trajectory attached for Mystery Spill reported off Neah Bay, Washington. Note that the Adios oil weathering tables in the attachment are for diesel oil, though we are not certain of the oil type spilled at this time. The Adios tables provide a comparison of diesel persistence under light vs. relatively stronger wind conditions, as currently forecast by the NOAA National Weather Service. We would expect heavier oils to be significantly more persistent. [SEP] Weather Forecast Aug. 5 [SEP] Currents Strait of Juan de Fuca [SEP] A USCG overflight conducted this morning observed a few small patches of unrecoverable sheen in the same general area as the oil was first reported. No further action will be taken.
F/V Rough Seas (59 ft) ran aground at 1600 EDT on 7/31 and began breaking up with approximately 1500 gal of diesel on board. Initial estimate of 200 - 300 gal released. Thirty nesting pairs of piping plovers (a T/E bird) is in the area. [SEP] Tidal Heights [SEP] Photo by USCG Sector Delaware Bay. [SEP] Date: 1700 EDT August 2, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine  FROM: NOAA/NOS Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Sunken F/V Rough Seas, Little Egg Inlet, NJ FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of a potential spill from a sunken vessel. These notes are based on the following information: On July 31st the 59 foot F/V Rough Seas was reported sunken and breaking up approx 1600 EDT at 39 deg 29.1'N, 074 deg 17.5'W. The vessel was carrying est. 1500 gallons diesel, and sheen was visible on an overflight in the area this morning, but no position information was available. Salvage operations are expected to begin as early at tomorrow (Friday) morning with a crane on a barge arriving to remove the fuel tanks and other larger pieces of the vessel. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 48-hour Wind Forecast Thursday night: winds from the SE at 10-15 knots Friday: winds from the South at 10-15 knots Saturday: winds from the South at 10-15 knots, switching late to be from the NW at 5-10. 2) Trajectory The winds are predicted to have a southerly component tonight through tomorrow. If a release occurs during these winds, the oil would be moved with a northerly component, but the exact location of possible beach contact depends on the phase of the tide at the time of release. On a flooding tide, the south facing beaches south of Holgate, the southern beaches near Cupola and the Steven Islands could potentially be contacted by some of the diesel. On an ebbing tide, the south facing beaches south of Holgate may be contact by the diesel. If salvage operations are delayed until Saturday, when NE winds are forecast, please contact your SSC for an updated trajectory as soon as possible. 4) Weathering and Fate ADIOS weathering predictions are included for 15 knot and 10 knot wind conditions Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 75 deg F Time of Initial Release = August 2, 1300 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 1,500 bbl ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill bbl percent percent percent 1 1,500 - 3 - 1 - 97 2 1,500 6 2 92 3 1,500 - 9 - 5 - 85 4 1,500 13 11 76 5 1,500 - 16 - 18 - 65 6 1,500 19 27 53 7 1,500 - 22 - 37 - 41 8 1,500 24 46 30 9 1,500 - 25 - 54 - 20 10 1,500 26 60 13 11 1,500 - 27 - 65 - 9 Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 75 deg F Time of Initial Release = July 31, 1600 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 1,500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 1,500 - 11 - 3 - 87 2 1,500 21 9 70 3 1,500 - 28 - 18 - 55 4 1,500 31 25 43 5 1,500 - 34 - 32 - 35 6 1,500 35 37 28 7 1,500 - 36 - 41 - 23 8 1,500 36 44 19 9 1,500 - 37 - 47 - 16 10 1,500 37 50 13 11 1,500 - 38 - 51 - 11 12 1,500 38 53 9 [SEP] Photo by USCG Sector Delaware Bay. [SEP] Location according to initial Long/Lat from the USCG. [SEP] TO: NOAA SSC Ed Levine TIME: 1830 Wednesday, Aug 1, 2007 Spot weather forecast for F/V Rough Seas, Little Egg Inlet, NJ Sunrise-Sunset ---------------------- Today: Sunset 18:10 Thursday: Sunrise 03:57 Sunset 18:09 Wind History: ----------------------------- Yesterday evening, winds were light and variable, with a NE to E trend. Last night after midnight, the winds were 6-10 knots from the NW This morning, winds were light and variable, with a NW trend This afternoon, winds were calm with a slight SE trend Now, winds are SE at about 2 knots. Forecast: -------------------------------- Tonight: S Winds 5 TO 10 KT. SEAS 1 TO 2 FT. Thursday: S Winds 5 TO 10 KT. SEAS 1 TO 2 FT. Thursday Night: S Winds 5 TO 10 KT. SEAS 1 TO 2 FT. Friday: S Winds around 10 KT. SEAS 1 TO 2 FT. Friday Night: SW Winds around 10 KT. SEAS 1 TO 2 FT. Saturday SW Winds around 10 KT, becoming S. SEAS 1 TO 2 FT. Saturday Night: SW Winds 5 TO 10 KT. SEAS 1 TO 2 FT. Sunday S Winds around 10 KT. SEAS 2 TO 3 FT. [SEP] Marine Agencies Respond to Grounded Vessel By Herald Staff http://www.capemaycountyherald.com/article/7988-marine-agencies-respond-grounded-vessel# Protective containment boom contains oil and debris Thursday Aug. 2, 2007, from the 59-foot fishing boat Rough Seas in Little Egg Inlet, N.J. The boat ran aground Tuesday, and the Coast Guard, along with local and state agencies, is working together to salvage the boat. (Official Coast Guard photo) ATLANTIC CITY -- The Coast Guard, along with state and local agencies, continue to respond Aug. 2 to a fishing boat, which ran aground Tuesday in Little Egg Inlet. The Rough Seas, a 59-foot fishing boat, ran aground with one person aboard at about 3:45 p.m. July 31. New Jersey State Police transferred the operator of the boat to awaiting EMTs on shore. A boatcrew from Coast Guard Station Barnegat Light, secured the fishing boat and deployed a boom around it and in the entrance to the inlet in an attempt to contain any pollution that may leak out. The Coast Guard has established a field command post at the Jacques Cousteau National Estuarine Research Reserve and is working closely with the New Jersey State Police, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Sea Tow International on cleanup operations. A salvage plan has been approved by the Coast Guard, and salvage crews are staging equipment and personnel to begin salvage and cleanup operations. No sheen was visible today during a helicopter overflight assessment of the boat and shoreline. The Coast Guard is transmitting a broadcast notice to mariners alerting them of the situation. [SEP] Photo by USCG Sector Delaware Bay [SEP] Tidal Currents - South of incident, so local likely later [SEP] 6 August 2007 The SSC was told by USCG Sector Delaware Bay that the salvage operation went smoothly yesterday. However, since the vessel was so badly broken up, the salvors were unable to retrieve the fuel tanks. It is believed that at some point they floated away prior to the salvage barge arrival. The USCG is still tracking small pieces of debris to be picked up if necessary. There will be a debrief on the incident this Friday (8/10). [SEP] Courtesy USCG Sector Delaware Bay. [SEP] Photo by USCG Sector Delaware Bay
On Sunday morning, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by USCG Sector New Orleans of an oil spill in the GOM. At approximately 0200 hrs that same morning, an unidentified vessel was reported to have struck a wellhead platform in Breton Sound resulting in an oil spill. The reported position of the well and leak was 29° 33' 51" N Lat. 089° 20' 09" W Long. The well was secured at 1240 hrs the same day. The amount of oil released was reported as 80 bbls. [SEP] The following information was reported in a FWS website, http://www.fws.gov/breton/. The information is provided as part of an initial Resources at Risk (RAR) assessment only. Please see the website for complete details of the site. GENERAL INFORMATION: Breton National Wildlife Refuge is the second oldest refuge in the country and was 100 years old on October 4th, 2004. President Theodore Roosevelt heard about the destruction of birds and their eggs on Chandeleur and Breton Islands in 1904 and soon afterward created Breton NWR. He visited the Island in June of 1915, this is the only refuge Roosevelt ever visited. The island had been the site of a Lighthouse Station (destroyed by Hurricane Katrina). ENDANGERED & THREATENED SPECIES ON THE REFUGE: Brown Pelican, Least Tern, and Piping Plover OTHER WILDLIFE SPECIES: Breton NWR provides habitat for colonies of nesting wading birds and seabirds, as well as wintering shorebirds and waterfowl. Twenty-three species of seabirds and shorebirds frequently use the refuge, and 13 species nest on the various islands. The most abundant nesters are brown pelicans, laughing gulls, and royal, Caspian, and sandwich terns. Waterfowl winter near the refuge islands and use the adjacent shallows, marshes, and sounds for feeding and for protection during inclement weather. Redheads and lesser scaup account for the majority of waterfowl use. Other wildlife species found on the refuge include nutria, rabbits, raccoons, and loggerhead sea turtles. HABITAT DESCRIPTION: The dominant vegetation on Breton NWR are black mangrove, groundsel bush, and wax myrtle. Shallow bay waters around the islands support beds of manatee grass, shoal grass, turtle grass, and widgeon grass. [SEP] Photograph of oil spill source. The platform and wellhead are reported to be 8 feet below the surface. Emulsified oil and sheen are shown at the surface and a support vessel is at location (photograph provided by RP's Spill Management Team). [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Overflight map in pdf format from the 1430 hrs observations on 29 July 2007 (map provided by the RP's Spill Management Team). [SEP] Map showing the general location of Well #14 at Main Pass 21 and relationship to Breton Island NWR. [SEP] Location of source [SEP] Date: July 29, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division, Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Main Pass 21 Well Spill FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: County: Main Pass, La. Location: Breton Sound, 29?? 33' 51"N by 89?? 20' 9" At about 0200 CDT (7/29) a well head was damaged and began leaking oil. Initial observations reported a 10 mile slick, as wide as 2 miles in places, headed to the NE. Oil density: API 27. Estimated release rate: 176 bbls /day A later overflight at about 1200 CDT reported the leading edge to be to the NE at 29?? 35' 43"N by 89?? 19' 02" W. There was an area of about 4 mi by 4 mi near the source that had a 15% coverage of brown oil. The rest of the slick was silver and rainbow sheen. By 1330 CDT the well had been secured. The leak was stopped. An estimated 80 - 100 bbls of oil was lost. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds are expected to continue from the W at 5 - 10 knots into Wednesday night. Seas are expected to be in the 1 - 3 foot range. 2) Trajectory Analysis The movement of the oil has been controlled primarily by the winds. We expect this to continue. With the forecast expecting winds at 5 - 10 knots from the West, we would expect the oil to move to the E at about 1/3 of a knot and pass North of the Breton Islands. We do not expect the oil to impact the Breton Islands. By tomorrow morning, the slick should be about 4 - 6 miles ENE of it's current location and be just East of the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet channel. 3) Oil Fate Main Pass 21 oil is not in our ADIOS database. The following analysis is based on Main Pass Block 35 oil which is a little less dense than the oil spilled. We expect some of the oil to persist long enough to form tarballs. [SEP] End of Day Update, 29 July 2007 Divers were able to secure the master valve at well #14 and any additional leakage from the flowline was reported to be held in check by a vacuum being held on the line. While the facility was not deemed secure, the spill source was stopped at 1240 hrs on 29 July. The NOAA trajectory forecasted the residual oil to move to the east at about 1/3 of a knot and pass north of the Breton Islands. Based on this forecast, there is not expected to be any oil spill impact risk to Breton Island. Breton Island is a very important pelican rookery with Breton Sound and is federally protected habitat. The 1430 hrs overflight latter the same day reported that the slick was limited to sheen and quickly diminishing brown streamers. The CGA Grand Bay skimming vessel had recovered only 2 gallons of oil and reported nothing skimmable at present time and location. Rainsqualls moving through the area probably are assisting in natural dissipation. The request to consider dispersants were taken off of the table at this time. The last overflight of the day at approximately 1700 hrs reported the slick was 1 x 3 miles in size with 75% coverage to include 25% brightly colored sheen, 50% silver, and 25% barely visible. The slick was reported as widely scattered and broken, and was continuing to dissipate. The slick was moving in an easterly direction (as forecasted) and away from the shoreline. A follow up overflight was scheduled for the next morning. Many of the resources such as the HOSS Barge and additional skimming vessels were stood down. The CGA Grand Bay was expected to remain on-scene. No sheen or oil was visible at the well site during the last overflight of the day. The RP is currently assessing damage to wellhead and preparing for repairs or shut in. The USCG continues to investigate the cause of incident. No wildlife issues or sightings in area of slick or well location were reported. The RP's spill management team reported that there were no fishing vessels or pleasure vessel sighted in area during the incident. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator continues to provide remote support to the USCG. [SEP] SPOT WEATHER FORECAST FOR Main Pass 21 Well Spill 1330 CDT, Sunday July 29, 2007 Sunday (7/29) Sunrise : 0617 CDT Sunset : 1956 Monday (7/30) Sunrise : 0618 Sunset : 1955 ________________________________ Wind Observations from NDBC Buoy 42007 Winds have been primarily from the W to WSW at 10 - 15 knots since midnight except for a 2 - 3 hour period this morning when winds were from the WNW at 5 - 10 knots. ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Sunday afternoon: W - SW winds 5 - 10 knots Sunday night : W winds at 5 - 10 knots Monday morning: W winds at 5 - 10 knots Monday afternoon: W winds at 5- 10 knots Monday night: W winds at 5 - 10 knots till midnight becoming W at 10 - 15 knots after 0100 Tuesday morning: W at 10 - 15 knots Tuesday afternoon: W at 5 - 10 knots Tuesday night: W at 5 - 10 knots _________________________ Waves: Sunday: 1- 2 foot seas Monday: 1 - 2 foot seas Tuesday: 1 - 3 foot seas _________________________________ Precipitation: Scattered thundershowers in the area through the coming week _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Good visibility except during periods of thundershowers _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Continued W winds 5 - 10 knots until late Wednesday night or Thursday morning when winds are expected to become NW at 10 - 15 knots. [SEP] On Sunday morning, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by USCG Sector New Orleans of an oil spill in the GOM. At approximately 0200 hrs
The 127 foot F/V Nordic Viking ran around in eastern PWS at 10:35 pm on July 21, 2007, 55 miles SE of Valdez.  One tank containing 3500 gallons of diesel was breached and release into the water.  11,500 gallons remained in eight other tanks which were not damaged.  The PRP hired Hudson Marine as the IMT and Alaska CHADUX to handle the response and the litering of the remaining fuel on board the vessel.   Weather was overcast with little to no wind and calm seas. [SEP] Saturday, July 28, 2007 - Nordic Viking Final Report Alaskan SSC arrived in Valdez on Thursday morning and immediately became engaged in the SCAT portion of the Nordic Viking response. The weather on-scene continued to be very calm conditions. A SCAT team, comprised of Coast Guard, state, RP and land owner representatives had already been formed and was busy in the field assessing shoreline accumulations and impacts of the diesel. The SSC joined the team as an advisor. One major area of activity was concentrated in and around Hells Hole, a sensitive, sheltered lagoon-like area on the north side of Port Gravina, roughly 6-7 nautical miles west of the spill site at the mouth of Olsen Bay. The impacts were restricted to roghly a 300 meter section of the beach just inside the entrance to Hells Hole. This shoreline is a rather porous combination of sub-angular pebbles and cobbles with the most evident infauna being barnacles on the cobbles in the lower intertidal zone. The diesel formed a light "bath-tub ring" on this shoreline and only expressed itself on the water surface as an ephemeral silvery sheen when the shoreline sediments were disturbed (see photo). The state SCAT members were concerned that this sheen might have deleterious effects on birds; however, after consultation with Jacqui Michel, Gary Shigenaka, Alan Mearns and Heidi Stout (Tri-State Bird Rescue Center) those fears were allayed. As the diesel was decreasing daily, it was decided to just let Mother Nature take care of removing the minor amount of diesel in this short beach section. A second area, in and on both sides of a salmon stream, of slightly more contaminated beach gravel, was also closely examined and debated. However, it was decided that the net environmental benefit between an intrusive remediation technique and doing nothing weighed in favor of again letting Mother Nature take care of the situation with tidal pumping, wind and wave energy. This completed the SCAT assessment and the team was disbanded on Friday evening, July 27, 2007. Meanwhile the RP was preparing towing, decontamination, and waste disposal plans. Since the Nordic Viking had incurred engine damage during the grounding, a plan was developed to tow it to Seward, Alaska, to a dry dock facility for repairs (see photos). On the final evening of Friday, July 27, the NOAA SSC participated in a review and "hot wash" of the entire incident along with the Unified Command. The major points that resulted were: 1.) contingency plans by the Coast Guard and the State need to be developed to immediately utilize a portion of the vast response resources available at Alyeska/SERVS for non-TAPS spills in PWS; had these resources been brought into play very earlier in the scenario, it probably would have made a positive difference in the outcome and effects of the spill; 2.) more information needs to be developed regarding on-water and shoreline clean-up techniques for diesel spills since those are the most common in PWS and Alaska (much time was spent chasing after on-water oil in the rainbow to metallic thicknesses range) ; 3.) on a spill where there is no stipulation for a Qualified Individual (like for a fishing boat spill), the Coast Guard needs to be more proactive in expeditiously guiding the RP into the best and most appropriate response actions; and 4.) the Unified Command needs to develop and enforce unanimity of action instead of having one or more parties acting unilaterally. The Nordic Viking spill response was closed down late Friday night, July 27, and the NOAA SSC journeyed back to Anchorage on Saturday morning. Alaska NOAA SSC on-scene: John Whitney Departed Valdez on Saturday morning, July 28, 2007 [SEP] representative silvery diesel sheen at Hells Hole, PWS [SEP] July 22- overflight view of diesel on water: silvery, rainbow and metallic sheen [SEP] Nordic Viking grounded on July 22 [SEP] Tug Redoubt with Nordic Viking in tow [SEP] Nordic Viking under tow from PWS to Seward, AK, for repairs [SEP] July 22 - Nordic Viking with Alaska Challenger along side serving as a work platform [SEP] On Sunday afternoon, July 22, a coast Guard helo with an ADEC responder on board reported a sheen/slick 5 miles long by 200 feet wide. The vessel owner contracted Alaska Chadux and the landing craft Alaska Challenger from Valdez to assist with the spill cleanup and removal of any remaining fuel on board the F/V Nordic Viking. Later that day, it was reported to the Coast Guard that the vessel had been boomed off and the fuel leak had appeared to have stopped. The response contractor, Chadux, was continuing to remove any remaining fuel inside the containment boom. The Alaska Dept. of Fish and Game also closed the commercial salmon fishery for the Port Gravina area. Initially weather was overcast and with little to no wind and the seas were quite calm. It has remained that way through Wednesday, June 25. The NOAA SSC was contacted Sunday morning by the Valdez Coast Guard and was told that everything was under control and that there was no need for his presence in Valdez or on -scene. As a result, the Coast Guard was provided with an ADIOS diesel weathering output which showed that under these very calm conditions, roughly half the diesel would have evaporated in a day and one-half. The USCG, ADEC, and the RP established an Incident Management Team at the Marine Safety Unit in Valdez. Due to poor weather only one over flight was conducted on Monday, July 23, by the CG helo out of Cordova. Initially the diesel spread out east, west and north of the vessel location, into Parshas Bay and Olsen Bay and the headlands between these two bays. Responders began open water recovery of the spilled diesel fuel west of the grounding site on July 23, even though fuel spread into a thin slick of silvery sheen, rainbow and metallic colors. Reportedly the mechanical skimming of this spilled diesel was not particularly effective. Alaska Dept of Fish and Game patrolled the spill area on Monday by boat and they did not observe any wildlife showing signs of distress. The commercial salmon fishery for Port Gravina remained closed. As of Tuesday night, July 24, all the diesel fuel was removed from the vessel and the Nordic Viking had been re- floated with response crews continuing to maintain containment boom around the vessel and are using sorbents to recover small amounts of oils that are being released from the vessel. Two additional ADEC responders are traveling to the spill area to begin the shoreline cleanup assessment. The PRP has contracted Polaris Applied Sciences, Inc to assist with this assessment. As a result the CG has requested the on-scene presence of the NOAA SSC, and he will be traveling to Valdez on Thursday morning, July 26, to be a part of this assessment to determine what shoreline cleanup may be needed for the impacted shoreline. [SEP] July 23 - Nordic Viking refloated and surrounded by boom and lots of work boats
USCG Sector Portland called to request a trajectory for potential release of 700 gallons of diesel and 50 gallons of gasoline from a 50 foot pleasure craft that grounded on the Rogue River Reef late the night of July 13 approximately 3.2 miles off the Coast of Oregon, near the mouth of the Rogue River. [SEP] Chart of grounding area
USCG notified the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary manager that fishermen reported a heavy diesel sheen and odor near Tatoosh, Island.  No releases had been reported in the area.  USCG Air Station Port Angeles will conduct an overflight of the area as soon as possible. [SEP] USCG Air Station Port Angeles conducted two overflights on 7/14/07 to investigate the reported sheen. A small area of rainbow sheen was reported during a morning overflight. No clear source was identified. No oil was observed during a follow-up overflight conducted later in the day. No environmental impacts were observed or reported.
At 0900 on 13 July 2007, the Tug Russel B. Murray grounded north of the Newport News Channel on the Newport News Bar. (36deg 57.800N, 076deg 23.040W) An unknown amount of the 34,000 gal of diesel fuel was released. Boom and sobents were deployed. After initial grounding, vessel suffered loss of power and was floating freely until USCG secured vessel and brought it dockside. Damage to hull being temporarily repaired. USCG anticipating that remaining fuel will be lightered later this evening.  USCG requested weather and trajectory analysis from NOAA. [SEP] [attached pdf has same information] Date: 1615 EDT July 13, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Frank Csulak  FROM: NOAA/NOS Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Grounded Tug Russell B. Murray, Hampton Roads FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of a potential spill from a grounded vessel. These notes are based on the following information: The Tug Russel B Murray reported as grounded at approx. 0900 hr today outside the Newport News channel. The tug is carrying approx. 34,000 gallons of diesel. Location is given as 36 deg 57.800'N, 076 deg 23.040'W. The vessel is not currently leaking oil, and is undergoing repair of a hole in preparation for lightering operations. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 48-hour Wind Forecast Friday: Afternoon: Winds from the E at 5-10 knots. Evening: Winds from the E to SE at 10-15 knots. Night: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Saturday Morning: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Afternoon: Winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Night: Winds from the S at 10-15 knots. 2) Trajectory Since the vessel is not currently leaking, we can only estimate scenarios for release over the forecast period. All forecast winds have a southerly component, indicating that the oil would move northward with the winds, and further up or down the James River depending on the phase of the tide and the exact winds at the time of release. Oil released over the next 24 hours could reach as far up-river as the Newport News side of the James River Bridge, and as far downriver as Old Point Comfort. 3) Weathering and Fate Diesel Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as 'marine diesel'. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil #2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films, often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. These oils do not generally present an involved cleanup problem. However, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and can persist as a biological threat in low energy marine environments. Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 65 deg F Time of Initial Release = July 13, 1300 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 34,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 34,000 - 2 - 0 - 98 2 34,000 5 1 94 4 34,000 - 11 - 4 - 86 6 34,000 17 10 73 8 34,000 - 22 - 19 - 60 10 34,000 26 28 47 12 34,000 - 28 - 37 - 35 14 34,000 30 44 26 16 34,000 - 31 - 50 - 19 18 34,000 32 55 14 20 34,000 - 32 - 58 - 10 [SEP] Tidal Heights [SEP] T/V RUSSEL B MURRAY, NEWPORT NEWS, VA 1530 EDT. JULY 13, 2007 Sunrise/Sunset: Sunset (07/13): 2025 Sunrise (07/14): 0557 Sunset (07/14): 2025 __________________________________________ WINDS Friday Afternoon: Winds from the E at 5-10 knots. Evening: Winds from the E to SE at 10-15 knots. Night: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Saturday Morning: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Afternoon: Winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Night: Winds from the S at 10-15 knots. ___________________________________________ SEAS Friday Afternoon: Combined seas 1 foot or less. Night: Combined seas 1-2 feet. Saturday Morning: Combined seas 1-2 feet. Afternoon: Combined seas 1-2 feet. Night: Combined seas 1-2 feet. ___________________________________________ PRECIPITATION Isolated showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. ___________________________________________ EXTENDED OUTLOOK Sunday Morning: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Afternoon: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Night: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Morning: Combined seas 1-3 feet. Afternoon: Combined seas 1-3 feet. Night: Combined seas 1-3 feet. Monday Morning: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Afternoon: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Night: Winds from the SW at 10-15 knots. Morning: Combined seas 1-2 feet. Afternoon: Combined seas 1-2 feet. Night: Combined seas 1-2 feet. [SEP] Tugboat spills fuel in river NEWPORT NEWS -- A tugboat ran aground Friday morning near the Newport News Small Boat Harbor, spilling an unknown amount of its diesel fuel. The Coast Guard was on the scene throughout the day, trying to contain and clean up the spill. The tug was carrying 34,000 gallons of marine diesel at the time of the accident, but it's unknown how much spilled, said Jerry Crooks, chief of investigations for the Coast Guard's Portsmouth station. The harbor is near the Monitor-Merrimac Memorial Bridge-Tunnel. A sheen - spotted by a Coast Guard plane near the north island of the bridge-tunnel - measured about a quarter-mile long by 200 yards wide, Crooks said. Crooks said small-craft boaters should stay away from the clean-up site, but the spill did not pose a great threat to human health. It's not clear why the Russell B. Murray, a 104-foot vessel owned by Express Marine Inc., ran aground, Crooks said. Right now the Coast Guard is focusing on responding to the accident, and will investigate later, he said. The grounding opened a 6-inch hole in the vessel, which took on water. The vessel also spilled some waste oil from its bilge pump, Crooks said. The Coast Guard and cleaning contractors responded by floating a containment boom around the ship and by applying what are called "hydrophobic" fabrics to the spill. The hydrophobics repel water but soak up contaminants. Of the fuel that escaped to create the visible sheen, Crooks said that in hot weather like we have now it evaporates faster than it can be contained and cleaned up. As of Friday afternoon, the plan was to drain the remaining fuel from the tug and apply a temporary patch to the opening in the hull. The ship would then be towed to a local shipyard and taken out of the water for investigation and repair, Crooks said. Once the remaining fuel is siphoned, officials can calculate the amount spilled, Crooks said. [SEP] Tidal Currents [SEP] After running aground, the tugboat was towed to Lyon's Shipyard for repairs. Cause of incident under investigation. USCG estimates that less than 1,000 gallons of diesel fuel was spilled. No further NOAA assistance requested. Case closed.
T/V WHITE SEA carrying 556,000 bbls of #2 diesel fuel ran aground in Ambrose Channel between Coney Island, NY and Sandy Hook, NJ while leaving NY Harbor.  It has been reported that a problem with the steering system caused the vessel to run aground. No oil has been released. On the afternoon of 7/12/07 there was an unsuccessful attempt to remove the vessel from the grounding site using tugs. USCG and RP in process of preparing salvage and lightering plans.  Plan calls for the lightering of 110,000 bbls, expected duration is 10-12 hours. Dive surveys are being planned to ascertain vessel condition and required exit path. Sounding surveys indicate vessel aground along port side from bow to midship. Anticipated refloating schedule would be at high tide, approximately 2000 hourson 7/13. [SEP] Three tugs safely pulled the grounded vessel from the Amborse Shipping Channel at 6:20pm on Friday, 7/13/07 during high tide after lightering 120,000 barrels of fuel oil earlier in the day. There were no reports of fuel product in the water. The ship sufferd breaches in two ballast tanks, but the product compartments inside the double-hulled vessel remained intact. Vessel sailing under its own power, but assisted by the three tugs, proceeded to Stapleton Anchorage, Staten Island, NY where a thorough vessel inspection will take place prior to the vessel departing. The TV White Sea is owned by the Singapore-based Tanker Pacific Management on a time charter to United Arab Emirates-based Westport Shipping Services. Its local agent is Atlantic Shipping Company. [SEP] T/V White Sea grounded with tug along side. Photo provided to the NOAA SSC from the USCG 1st Coast Guard District. [SEP] This is a an update report regarding the M/T WHITE SEA aground in Ambrose Channel. The 796 ft vessel went aground 0630 on Thursday while heading outbound in the Ambrose Channel. The vessel had approximately 556,000 gallons of low sulfur fuel oil onboard. The forepeak and number one port ballast tanks sustained some damage. The cargo tanks remain intact and there is no pollution at this time. Response personnel are currently working on plans to Lighter and re-float the vessel. Vessel Lightering started at 0200 this morning and estimated to be complete in time to re-float the vessel at high tide. The vessel will transfer approx 120,000 barrels prior to next high tide at 1800 this evening. Plans are in place for response in the event there is a spill prior to during or after re-floating the vessel. Appropriate government and responsible party contractor resources are on alert, in place or on stand-by to respond. 2,000 ft of 42" boom is ready for deployment. In addition, at Miller's on Staten Island are additional boom, skimmers and initial response equipment. Staged response equipment is capable of being on-scene in a very short time frame. [SEP] USCG Press Release 12July2007 [SEP] T/V White Sea bow. Photo provided to the NOAA SSC from the USCG 1st Coast Guard District. [SEP] Photos [SEP] Photo taken by USCG Sector NY on 7/12/07 [SEP] http://www.uscgnewyork.com/posted/802/070712.164247.wmv [SEP] Vessel remains stable and listing 4-5 degrees to port which is unchanged from initial on- scene report. Lightering barges on scene. Additional barge capacity available if needed. No oil released. No economic or environmental impacts expected. USCG enforcing safety/security zone.
The T/V Eagle Otome has grounded about 30 nm SE of the entrance to Galveston Bay. The location of the grounding is 29° 04.92' N by 094° 14.98' W.  The vessel contains 91 metric tons of heavy fuel oil which is about 25,000 gallons. No reported release at this time. [SEP] An email from Rich Arnhart, TGLO, via Buzz Martin indicated that the vessel is enroute to S. Fairway Anchorage and CG has requested a hull inspection. No pollution reported. [SEP] Date; July 1, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry / USCG Joseph Leonard FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded T/V off Galveston , Tx. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A T/V has grounded about 30 nm SE of the entrance to Galveston Bay. The location of the grounding is 29?? 04.92' N by 094?? 14.98' W. See attached map. The vessel has 91 metric tons of heavy fuel oil which is about 25,000 gallons. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast S - SE winds at 10 - 15 knots are expected through the week(through Friday night) for the outer coastal waters off Galveston Bay. Seas are expected to be 2 - 4 feet during the week. Scattered showers and possible thundershowers for the area through Friday. 2) Trajectory Analysis With the persistent onshore winds, a significant release of the persistent oil will result in beach impacts. Currently, the TABS buoys indicate upcoast flow from Mexico, south of Freeport, and a slight downcoast flow from Louisiana off the Galveston area. Under these conditions, should a significant spill occur over the next 72 hours, we would expect beach impacts in about 72 hours after the spill occurs, between Freeport and the entrance to Galveston Bay. Should a spill occur, the SSC, Charlie Henry, should be immediately notified for a more specific forecast. 3) Oil Fate The makeup of the oil is not known. However, we would expect at least 50% of a heavy fuel oil to persist long enough to impact shore. [SEP] At approximately 0020 hrs (Just after midnight) on 2 July, USCG MSU Galveston requested a trajectory forecast for a grounded tanker vessel. The 800 foot, EAGLE OTOMEIS was carrying 91,000 metric tons of a heavy fuel oil when it grounded just outside the normal traffic lane entrance to Galveston Bay, Texas. The reported position placed the vessel some 30 miles offshore. NOAA provided the requested support to the USCG and maintained a readiness posture to respond on-scene if required. Later the same day, the Tanker Vessel EAGLE OTOMEIS was refloated and directed to the South Fairway Anchorage. A hull assessment had been requested by the USCG. No pollution was reported at this time. Unless the situation changes, this entry will serve as the final report for the Tanker Vessel EAGLE OTOMEIS Incident. [SEP] Reported location of grounding
On Saturday, 23 June 2007, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a slick offshore Louisiana.  The slick was reported to cover a 20 square mile area, and was composed of sporadic sheen and observed emulsified oil.  The nearest point to land was 21 nautical miles E of the Mississippi Delta. [SEP] Selected photographs from the MMS/USCG overflight on 23 June 2007 that show several portions of a slick composed of silver and rainbow sheen as well as what appears to be emulsified oil (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Selected photographs from the MMS/USCG overflight on 23 June 2007 that show several portions of a slick composed of silver and rainbow sheen as well as what appears to be emulsified oil (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] The location of the incident is MP288, not MP228 as previously reported. Some of the older reports will stated MP228, but that is a mistake. All new entries will be identified correctly. [SEP] Selected photographs from the MMS/USCG overflight on 23 June 2007 that show several portions of a slick composed of silver and rainbow sheen as well as what appears to be emulsified oil (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Attached is a pdf map provided by the RP that identifies the initial located leak. [SEP] The attached map provides the location of the reported slicks offshore associated with the incident. The slick is not continious and composed mostly of sheen. [SEP] MMS informed the USCG that they have ordered Stone Energy (MP288) to decommission the 4 inch flow line that was discovered to have four holes in it and was the cause of the observed spill. No additional pollution issues have been reported. No additional response support has been requested by USCG Sector New Orleans. This entry will constitute the final report. [SEP] On Saturday, 23 June 2007, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a slick offshore Louisiana. The slick was reported to cover a 20 square mile area, and was composed of sporadic sheen and observed emulsified oil. The nearest point to land was 21 nautical miles E of the Mississippi Delta. NOAA was requested to provide a trajectory analysis. The initial reports of oil in this area were early last week. The USCG began working the issue at that time, but the scale of the problem was much smaller than that observed on Friday afternoon. The Scientific Support Coordinator was notified at that time by email, but that email was not viewed until a follow up phone call the next morning. At that time, no RP had been identified. The NOAA trajectory provided is attached as a separate ResponseLink entry. Most of the oil slick was expected to break and dissipate, but chunks of the emulsified oil as tarballs and pancakes might make shore in the SE portion of the Delta by mid-week. On Sunday, an RP was identified through requested pressure checks of all of the pipelines in the area. The source of the leak was determined to be a flowline at the MP228 facility. The USCG stated that the RP had stated that as much as 214 bbls of oil per day may have been lost when the line was active (I have not seen this statement in writing). At present, the facility has requested to pressure the line up with gas to determine the leak location. The USCG required that a response plan be established and that resources be positioned to respond to a subsequent leak. Additional information to follow. [SEP] Updated Information On 24 June 2007, the USCG was informed that the unknown sheen that had been observed for the past week in the area of Main Pass 288 area was indeed coming from Stone Energy's MP288A facility. On 25 June, the entire platform was shut in upon discovery of the leak at around 1900 the night before. The leak was discovered when they went to pressure test the line and saw it bubbling (observed gas escaping to the surface). The plans on the 25th focused on evacuating the line and using dye to identify the leak locations. The line that was identified as the source of the leak is a 4-inch departing line that goes from MP288A to MP289B and the capacity of the line is 238.9 bbls. On the 25th, the USCG observed no recoverable oil in the area, but very light sheen was observed during the flight. On 26 June, 4 holes were identified in the first 960 feet of the line beginning at the MP288A Facility. These were marked for repair. The USCG had required that a response vessel capable of skimming be either on-scene or positioned to response during all activities that could result in addition oil spillage. [SEP] Selected photographs from the MMS/USCG overflight on 23 June 2007 that show several portions of a slick composed of silver and rainbow sheen as well as what appears to be emulsified oil (photo credit, USCG).
M/V Koznitsa , a 600 foot freighter loaded w grain was outbound from Brunswick, Ga and grounded about 5000 ft from the Brunswick seabouy at appx pos 31-2.75N; 081-14.5W between 12 and 1 pm est 6/23/2007. draft is 12M at stern 9 M at the bow. CG reports vsl is hard aground and plan lightering ops to try to float vessel at high tide. Fuel on board is not now known. [SEP] WEATHER FORECAST M/V Koznitsa grounding 1530 EDT. JUNE 23, 2007 Sunrise/Sunset: Saturday June 23: Sunset 2033 EDT Sunday June 24: Sunrise 0623 Sunset 2034 Monday June 25: Sunrise 0623 Sunset 2034 __________________________________________ WINDS Saturday (6/23) Night : From SE at 10 - 15 knots becoming S at 10 - 15 knots late evening Sunday (6/24) Morning : From SE at 10 - 15 knots Afternoon: From SE at 10 - 15 knots Night: From SE at 10 - 15 knots Monday (6/25) Morning : From SE at 5 - 10 knots Afternoon : From ESE at 10 - 15 knots Night: From SE at 10 - 15 knots Tuesday (6/25) Morning : From ESE at 5 - 10 knots Afternoon : From E at 10 - 15 knots Night : From E at 10 - 15 knots ___________________________________________ SEAS Saturday (6/23) Night : Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Sunday (6/24) Morning : Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Afternoon: Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Night: Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Monday (6/25) Morning : Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Afternoon : Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Night: Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Tuesday (6/25) Morning : Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Afternoon : Combined seas 2 - 3 feet Night : Combined seas 3 - 4 feet _______________________________________ PRECIPITATION No severe weather expected for the forecast period _______________________________________ EXTENDED OUTLOOK A sustained Easterly flow expected by the middle of next week with a possible tropical wave developing in South Florida. This could result in winds increasing to 15 - 20 knots by late Wednesday and seas building to 4 - 6 feet Wednesday evening and into Thursday morning. [SEP] Red squares are hard bottom, blue is potential hard bottom, green is no hard bottom [SEP] The hot pink rectangles are Snapper Grouper EFH-HAPC The red grids are hardbottom habitat The blue grids are potential hardbottom habitat The green grids are not hardbottom habitat [SEP] WEATHER FORECAST M/V KOZNITSA GROUNDING 1330 EDT. JUNE 25, 2007 Sunrise/Sunset: Sunset (06/25): 2034 Sunrise (06/26): 0624 Sunset (06/26): 2034 __________________________________________ WINDS Monday (6/25) Afternoon: Winds from the E at 10-15 knots. Night: Winds from the E at 10-15 knots. Tuesday (6/26) Morning: Winds from the E at 10-15 knots. Afternoon: Winds from the E at 10-15 knots. Night: Winds from the E at 10-15 knots. ___________________________________________ SEAS Monday (6/25) Afternoon: Combined seas 2-3 feet. Night: Combined seas 2-3 feet. Tuesday (6/26) Morning: Combined seas 2-3 feet. Afternoon: Combined seas 2-3 feet. Night: Combined seas 2-4 feet. _______________________________________ PRECIPITATION Isolated showers and thunderstorms are expected tonight through Tuesday. _______________________________________ EXTENDED OUTLOOK A sustained Easterly flow is expected in the middle of next week with the possibility of a tropical wave developing in South Florida. This could result in winds increasing to 15-20 knots by late Wednesday and seas building to 3-5 feet Wednesday evening and into Thursday. [SEP] Date: 1415 June 25, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/NOS Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded M/V Koznitsa off Brunswick, Georgia FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of a potential spill from a grounded vessel These notes are based on the following information: The M/V Koznitsa, a 600 foot freighter loaded with grain, was outbound from Brunswick, Georgia, when the vessel grounded about 5000 ft from the Brunswick sea buoy at approx. pos 31-2.75N; 081-14.5W between 12 and 1 pm EST Saturday, June 23, 2007. Vessel draft is 12 meters (39.4 feet) at stern, and 9 meters (29.5 feet) at the bow. CG reports the vessel as hard aground and plan lightering operations to try to refloat the vessel on a high tide. Fuel type is unknown, but is expected to be a heavier fuel oil. The vessel is carrying approx 703.9 m3 (186000 gallons) fuel oil and approx 22.3 m3 (5900 gallons) lube oil. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 48-hour Wind Forecast Today through tomorrow night, winds from the East at 10-15 knots are forecast. 2) Trajectory Coastal HF Radar from the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography shows this area to be inshore of the Gulf Stream, with weaker currents less than knot in variable directions. If oil spills during this forecast period, the forecast winds from the East would move the oil inshore within four hours toward Jekyll Island, Georgia, with some potential contact with the southern portion of St Simons Island. If the oil reached the area of St Simons Sound during a flood tide, some oil could be advected into the estuary. 3) Weathering and Fate Heavy Fuel Oils Heavy refined products, such as Intermediate Fuel Oils (IFO), Fuel Oil No. 6 and Bunker C, are more persistent than lighter refined products. The refining process has removed the lighter components and left them somewhat pre-weathered. As a result they can present quite persistent floating pollutant problems. These oils do occasionally form an emulsion, but usually only slowly, and after a period of days. These oils do not spread into very thin films and often simply break up into smaller patches and then tarballs. It is also common for these oils to lose enough of their light ends so that they do not rapidly form sheens and the resulting scattered tarball fields are very difficult to observe using visual, or remote sensing techniques. This, combined with the persistence of the tarballs, makes these kinds of spills quite likely to result in long range, and occasionally unexpected, beach impacts. Fuel Oil No. 6 has a much lower vapor pressure than diesel and will thus be less volatile. The proportion lost to evaporation will be small as will the amount permanently dispersed into the water column. Fuel Oil No. 6 can emulsify with a typical water content of around 30% but usually does so slowly. Oil Name = FUEL OIL NO.6 API = 12.3 Pour Point = 59 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 65 deg F Time of Initial Release = June 25, 1100 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 704 metric tonnes ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill metric ton percent percent percent 1 704 - 0 - 0 - 100 2 704 1 0 99 4 704 - 1 - 0 - 99 8 704 3 0 97 12 704 - 4 - 1 - 95 16 704 5 1 94 20 704 - 5 - 2 - 93 24 704 6 2 92 30 704 - 6 - 3 - 91 36 704 6 4 90 42 704 - 7 - 4 - 89 48 704 7 5 89 54 704 - 7 - 5 - 88 60 704 7 6 87 66 704 - 7 - 6 - 87 72 704 7 7 86 78 704 - 7 - 7 - 85 84 704 8 7 85 90 704 - 8 - 8 - 84 96 704 8 8 84 102 704 - 8 - 9 - 83 108 704 8 9 83 114 704 - 8 - 9 - 83 120 704 8 10 82 Lubricating Oils Lubricating oils are ubiquitous. They are used in all types of engines operating on land, at sea, or in the air. All lubricating oils are composed mainly of high-boiling point (>400 ??C) hydrocarbons containing 25 to 40 carbon atoms per molecule. Compound classes that impart undesirable qualities to a lubricant (waxes, polar compounds, and others) are removed in the refining processes. To meet the requirements of many different engine types and operating conditions, a multitude of oil products have been developed. These can be divided into two groups: 1) oils used in continuous service, such as turbine oils and 2) oils used in intermittent service, such as motor oils. Oils used in continuous service operate at a fairly constant temperature for prolonged periods without frequent shutdown or renewal. Stability is of prime importance. Oils used in intermittent service must show little viscosity change with temperature (high viscosity indices). These oils must also be changed at frequent intervals to remove particulates collected during service. Stability of these oils is, therefore, a secondary consideration. Additives Additives are used to improve or impart various properties to the highly refined lubricating base oil. Automotive engine oils can contain a wide
The NOAA SSC was notified of a metallic sheen observed south of Newport, RI.  The sheen was observed by a helocopter overflight.  Dimensions reported were 300 X 800 yards. [SEP] Map of sheen location
On June 11, 2007 ERD was notified of a well blowout 15 miles south of Intercoastal City, LA. [SEP] On Tuesday 7/10/07, the RP conducted an operation to remove a portion of the contaminated spoil to facilitate addition widening of the canal. The so-called "scalping operation" of the spoil bank on the northeast side of the well/slip was conducted to separated contaminated soil from uncontaminated soil and dredge spoil (see attached photos & map provided by RP's environmental consultant). [SEP] Photograph taken during the 2 July 2007 site visit (photo credit, NOAA). Approaching the derrick in the south end of the canal. A jack-up rig and several additional barges are shown to assist the cleanup and repair. [SEP] A series of site photographs taken by a USCG Pollution Investigation Team have been added to ResponseLink. No specific information for any of the photographs was provided. The photos primarily illustrate the appearance of accumulated mud that was blown on the facility structures and adjacent spoil bank and wetland habitat (photo credit ,USCG). [SEP] WELL BLOWOUT, FRESHWATER BAYOU CANAL, LA 1300 CDT, Monday June 11, 2007 Sunset (06/11): 1952 Sunrise (06/12): 0602 Sunset (06/12): 1952 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This afternoon, the winds are predicted to be from the SW at 5-10 knots. Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the SW at 5-10 knots shifting late tonight to be from the NW at 5-10 knots. Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 knots. _________________________ Waves: This afternoon through Tuesday, the seas are expected to be 1-2 feet in open water with protected waters being smooth. _________________________________ Precipitation: This afternoon through Tonight, scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms are forecast in the region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Thursday, mostly clear skies are expected. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the mid to upper 80's to lows in the mid 70's. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, SW winds at 5-10 knots. Seas are expected to be 1-2 feet in open water with protected waters smooth. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms. Thursday, SW winds at 5-10 knots. Seas are expected to be 1-2 feet in open water with protected waters smooth. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms. Friday, S winds at 10-15 knots. Seas are expected to be 2-3 feet in open water with protected waters smooth. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of afternoon showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Photograph taken during the 2 July 2007 site visit (photo credit, NOAA). Close-up view of mud after more than a month. The mud has dried to form the pattern observed after repeated rains and hot sun-baked days. [SEP] A series of site photographs taken by a USCG Pollution Investigation Team have been added to ResponseLink. No specific information for any of the photographs was provided. The photos primarily illustrate the appearance of accumulated mud that was blown on the facility structures and adjacent spoil bank and wetland habitat (photo credit ,USCG). [SEP] Document that delineates area of drill mud deposition on adjacent spoil bank. Information provided by RP's Environmental Consultant. [SEP] Photograph taken during the 2 July 2007 site visit (photo credit, NOAA). View of unimpacted are on east side of canal. This exposed spoil bank was similar to that on the opposite side before the incident. [SEP] Small scale Base Map [SEP] A series of site photographs taken by a USCG Pollution Investigation Team have been added to ResponseLink. No specific information for any of the photographs was provided. The photos primarily illustrate the appearance of accumulated mud that was blown on the facility structures and adjacent spoil bank and wetland habitat (photo credit ,USCG). [SEP] Photograph taken during the 2 July 2007 site visit (photo credit, NOAA). Ground view with derrick in background. [SEP] On 2 July 2007, representatives from the State of Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ), United States Coast Guard (USCG), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and Responsible Party (RP) representatives conducted a site visit of the well blowout area to assess environmental cleanup needs and requirements. The environmental site assessment had been delayed due to continuing efforts to fully secure the well and related safety concerns. At present, the well is still being worked to restore full control, but was deemed safe for the planned activities. The rig currently on-site will be demobilized and addition equipment brought in to complete the well control operation. From an environmental prospective, the two primary concerns are the mud deposited into the canal itself and the mud deposited on the spoil bank and adjacent wetland habitat. It was impossible to assess the canal given the current operations; therefore, this site visit focused only on the adjacent spoil bank and marsh. The drilling structure is located at the end of a man-made, dead-end canal and just north of Vermillion Bay. The well blowout resulted in a large amount of drilling fluid (mud) being deposited on the rig, in the adjacent canal, and on the eastern-side spoil bank. The drilling fluid was reported to be composed of 56.5 to 57 percent by volume diesel fuel as a lubricant, 4.5 to 5 percent water, and 38.5% by volume solids (primarily barite, a natural clay mineral). At the time of the incident, the log reported that 439 bbls of drilling mud was in the drill stream and that a total of 3,728 bbls composed the entire circulating volume. It is presently unknown how much of this material was lost to the environment. Much of it was sprayed onto the rig and barge itself. In some places, the thickness was reported as 6 feet at the base of the derrick. It is unknown to what extent production water and produced condensate (light petroleum distillant from the gas reservoir) impacted the adjacent area. During the event, mud spray impacted an area estimated as between 2 and 3 acres by coving the surface with a thick coating of diesel-based mud up to 10 to 12 cm in thickness. During the site visit, the deposition was roughly characterized as trace, light (only a few mm), and heavy. The RP's Environmental Representative will prepare a rough composite map of the area assessed. Adjacent vegetation was killed to include several hackberry and black locust trees and various scrub plant species and adjacent marsh plants. Given that most of the area was exposed spoil bank prior to the incident, the vegetative coverage of the impacted area was small. A composite sample of the surface mud contamination was collected for analysis by NOAA. In the impacted area, multiple attempts to recolonize the area by fiddler crabs was evidenced, but none of the crab burrows were completed and several dead fiddler crabs were observed. No live crabs were observed in the impacted area. Such observations would suggest that some mitigation would be required, and that was generally stated by the USCG representatives. Final discussion was postponed until the analytical results were available. To complicate the cleanup or mitigation process, the RP reported that they were considering a proposal to widen the work area by widening the canal. The state and federal representatives on the site visit requested that during any removal activity that the contaminated mud and sediments be segregated for assessment and proper disposal. At present, none of the regulatory agency had been presented an actual proposal. The plan was only being assessed by the RP at this time. Also note that the canal did have some form of flapper gated access on the south end probably for water management purposes. At present, this has been sealed with concrete. This report characterizes the general observations of the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on-scene, and has not been reviewed or edited by the other members of the site assessment team. It will be provided to them for review, and the report may be edited in the future.
Request came to Steve from Marine Mammal Stranding Response Coordinator in NE to do a hindcast on a bloated, dead whale.  Whale was sighted on May 30. [SEP] Hindcast estimate [SEP] Photo from Marine Mammal Stranding Response Coordinator.
Following Hurricane Katrina, oil pollution was observed in the area of Garden Island Bay (part of the Louisiana Mississippi River Delta).  The initial response was included as one of more than one hundred small pollution cases investigated during the post-hurricane response under ESF-10.  Subsequently, this site was been identified as a chronic source of oil pollution that may be derived from some historical, subsurface oil spill incident that wasn't observed until after the hurricane eroded much of the marsh in SE Louisiana.  A possible source is a submerged pipeline.  The USCG has requested renewed assistance from NOAA in this investigation. [SEP] During the Hurricane Katrina response, oil pollution was first observed at the Garden Island Bay site. This site was one of more than a hundred small releases investigated during the post-hurricane response. This response is being added as a separate ResponseLink entry to track the current site investigations and response activities. NOAA has been requested to provide detailed analytical chemistry support as part of the current investigation. During follow-up investigations, it was determined that the source of the pollution was probably from an old release that was disturbed by erosion and land loss created by the hurricane. Some reports estimate that more than 100 square miles of coastal marsh and lands were lost in SE Louisiana from the storm. Pollution from the site was observed on multiple overflights during the months following Hurricane Katrina, and oil pollution is still being observed at the site. The area has been boomed is cleanup routinely by an OSRO. The site is a chronic source of oil pollution. The latitude and longitude of the center area of the Garden Island Bay site was reported as 29 degrees, 04 minutes, 21 seconds N Latitude and 089 degrees, 10 minutes, 44 seconds W Longitude. Goldking, the current site operator, conducted an investigation in 2006. Multiple sediment core samples were taken at site. Some areas had over 300,000 ppm oil/grease content. More than one core sample indicated that there was a concentration of over 5,000 ppm at a depth of 17 ft. Based on this investigation and the identification of an adjacent, subsurface pipeline operated by Shell Pipeline, the initial RP (Goldking) stated that the pollution was not sourced from any of their activities, but rather from Shell's. The investigation continued at this point with no clear RP. In 2006, the USCG issued Notice of Federal Interests to the two possible RPs, naming both companies as potential sources of the spill. Next, Sector New Orleans then examined USCG historical spill data/records, spill sample analyses, and other agency data to rule out several other potential sources (pits, flow lines, pipelines, wells, etc.) in the immediate area of the spill site. After examining all data and available evidence, the Coast Guard determined a 10-inch pipeline (last operated by Shell Pipeline) as the most probable source of the persistent sheening at the Garden Island Bay site. As part of the follow up investigation by Shell, a series of sediment samples were taken at the site. The USCG has requested that NOAA assist in their investigation by analyzing a subsample of the samples collected by Shell. The samples should arrive at Louisiana State University (NOAA's Chemistry Support Laboratory) on 31 May 2007. Additional Background Information The Coast Guard investigation included the following site information: Garden Island Bay is located in Plaquemines Parish, LA in the Pass A Loutre State Waterfowl Management Area. There is a history of land loss in the area. The area was impacted by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita. 55% of area converted to open water. Area is actively sheening and was designated a Hurricane Katrina minor spill (originally under Enervest). Goldking is currently leasing the land from the State. The field was initially developed by Texaco, sold to Enervest in 2000, and then sold to Goldking on 31 October 2005. Goldking has been conducting clean-up operations since the hurricane (OSRO - OilMop). Samples of the oil were taken after the hurricane by Enervest and additional samples were recently collected by CG personnel. The samples indicate that oil is relatively old due to the lack of light ends. The samples that the CG took were not a match with the oil that is currently found at Goldking. Goldking contracted Quatenary Resource Investigation, LLC to conduct coring and sampling at the site. They provided a detailed report of the findings. As per the T. Baker Smith survey, there is a cluster of flowlines that lead directly into the "problem area" (buried, cannot be seen when you go to the site) and a flowline that leads to a platform within the boomed area that are technically Goldking's. The flowlines were ruled out as probable sources since no USCG spill history was found for those flowlines. Additionally, they were also ruled out as a probable source due to the fact that the heaviest concentrations of oil were found well below the substrate's surface, as these flowlines are above ground sources. LDNR SONRIS records reflect no production pit in the vicinity of this area. No evidence was found to indicate that this site was a pit, but the idea has not been officially ruled out due to the circular appearance of the area and its proximity to wells/facilities. Pit regulations were implemented in the mid 1980's. Pits which were previously abandoned, filled and/or sunk would not be included in the DNR database. No records have been found documenting the existence of a pit. Additionally, there is no other physical evidence that a pit existence at this location. T. Baker Smith Engineering was hired by Goldking and Shell to survey the location of the pipeline, as shown above. Shell owns the 10-inch pipeline that runs directly through the affected area, at a depth of about 6-8 ft beneath the surface of the substrate. On scene, it is clear that the Shell pipeline runs directly through the affected area. Goldking's Core Sampling report indicates a higher concentration level in the vicinity of the Shell Pipeline. Additional information will be provided. NOAA's response posture on this incident is to provide technical and scientific support to the USCG. NOAA has been an active participant in the investigation previously, but the change in level of interest and participation warranted inclusion as part of the ResponseLink spill documentation. Lead Scientific Support Coordinator, Charlie Henry.
On 17 May 2007, a USCG Pollution Investigation Team conducted an over flight of a reported 40 bbl crude oil spill adjacent to South Pass on the Mississippi River Delta.  The location was identified as South Pass 24.  The USCG reported that the spill was well contained by hard boom and within wetland habitat. NOAA was notified of the incident at this time, but since the scale of the problem appeared small and there were no need for specific on-scene NOAA support, the Scientific Support Coordinator provided only verbal consultation to the USCG until a site visit on 26 June. [SEP] Site 1 cleanup zone (photo credit, NOAA). Note cut vegetation and some trampling of marsh surface sediments. In general, the sediments in this area are relatively compact. [SEP] Photograph shows oil is interior pond adjacent to vegetative marsh (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Site 2, Area 5 (Item 5) cleanup zone (photo credit, NOAA). In the background is the area listed as Item 6 in the summary map. [SEP] Site 1, this area is on the SW corner of Site 1 (photo credit, NOAA). [SEP] Aerial Infrared Image of site provided by the RP's Environmental Rep. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] The attached pdf is a map with annotated comments from the site visit (document prepared by RP's Environmental Consultant). [SEP] Photograph shows oil is interior pond adjacent to vegetative marsh (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Photograph shows location of spill site (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Site 1 cleanup zone (photo credit, NOAA). Note cut vegetation and sorbent boom. The ship in the background is moving up-river in to the South Pass of the Mississippi River Delta. [SEP] Site 1 cleanup zone (photo credit, NOAA). Note cut vegetation and some trampling of marsh surface sediments. In general, the sediments in this area are relatively compact. [SEP] Photograph shows cleanup work in progress. Cut vegetation and a drum skimmer are shown adjacent to an airboat (photo credit, LOSCO).
On 14 May 2007, two humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) were observed within the Sacramento River upstream of Rio Vista, CA. NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Services, The Marine Mammal Center, the U.S. Coast Guard, California Department of Fish and Game, and the Governor's Office of Emergency Services responded and coordinated rescue operations. By 27MAY2007, the whales had moved downstream of the Rio Vista Bridge, lingered near the Benicia Bridge on 28MAY and continued on to the Pacific on 29MAY. [SEP] The dorsal fin and right side of the female cow, showing the skin lesions, taken on May 28, 2007. This photo was 48 hours after administration of antibiotics and 24 hours after the whales' return to more saline water. Photo by: Bob Wilson, The Marine Mammal Center. [SEP] Photo of the cow with blowhole showing skin lesions similar to calf, and partial view of the wound. Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA/NMFS [SEP] Sunday May 20, 7:30 p.m. At approximately 2:30 p.m. today, the two humpback whales that have been swimming in the West Sacramento turning basin started moving down the Sacramento Channel. The whales' action may have been in response to two tugs moving down the channel to assist a commercial vessel docking at the Agrium dock just south of the port. Officials are moving quickly to try and take advantage of this unexpected development by rushing to the whales boats that will be used to help keep the animals from entering the sloughs and tributaries beginning at the river's delta near Rio Vista. The animals are being followed by various vessels from the of Coast Guard, Fish and Game and Yolo and Sacramento county sheriffs departments. The whales were 14.5 miles south of the Port of Sacramento at 7:00 p.m. [SEP] Update on the whale rescue efforts from the Joint Information Center: ********************************************************* On Wednesday, May 23rd, the rescue team attempted multiple strategies to try and help coax the whales out of the River and towards the ocean: * In the morning, the team deployed several vessels on the water and the team exposed the whales to sounds by banging on pipes and having a tug boat maneuver in the area. The whales did not respond as hoped, and they remained in the general area of the Rio Vista Bridge. * In the afternoon, the team employed a new strategy by playing different sounds to the whales: (1) recordings of humpback whales feeding in Monterey Bay, (2) recordings of killer whales attacking a gray whale cow/calf pair off the coast of California, and (3) synthesized tonal sounds generated in a laboratory (similar to a car alarm). The whales did not respond to these playbacks either. As a result, the plan for Thursday, May 24th is to continue the visual health assessments and behavioral observations to monitor the whale's condition. No sounds will be used. The veterinarians and biologists on site believe that the whales need a day without excessive stimuli. [SEP] Hi All, I just talked with Frances (4:25 PM Sunday). The whales decided to move on their own. They are 5 miles down the channel right now and still going the right direction. Frances is with about 8 small boats following along. They picked up the pipes a little while ago but have not had to use them yet. My understanding is they never even brought the big ship up into the harbor. We're thinking we might just press the animals throughout the night, but we'll see what happens as it starts to get dark. Hopefully they will continue downriver and we'll just pick them up as we go along. Maybe they might even swim all the way out without our help. Wouldn't that be nice. You know you can make the best plan in the world, and have the training sessions all set up, and then the animals are just going to do what they're going to do. Fortunately they are doing exactly the right thing right now. Laurie J. Gage, D.V.M. USDA APHIS Large Cat Specialist [SEP] The humpback whale calf breaches with windsurfers off of Sherman Island in the Sacramento River. Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA Fisheries Service [SEP] The calf displaying the behavior known as tailslapping or lobtailing, which it has done periodically over the past three days (primarily observed at sunrise and sunset when observers were present at those times). Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA/NMFS [SEP] Left lateral view of the calf's dorsal fin. Such views are often used for identifying individual whales. (photo credit - The Marine Mammal Center) [SEP] The adult female humpback after her first antibiotic injection on 5/26/07. The syringe remained after the injection, but later fell out on its own. The cow received a total of 3 injections, and the calf received 1, to deliver the appropriate dose of the antibiotic. Photo by Bob Wilson, The Marine Mammal Center. [SEP] Following is the press release issued by the Joint Information Center on Wednesday, May 30, 2007: ***************************************************** After 3-week Inland Journey Wandering Whales Return to the Sea After almost three weeks meandering through the Sacramento River Delta, the wayward mother humpback whale and her calf that have been the subject of intense concern and a dedicated rescue effort, have apparently passed safely under the Golden Gate Bridge and back out to the Pacific Ocean. "A number of firsts were made during this operation," said Dr. Frances Gulland, Director of Veterinary Science at The Marine Mammal Center in Sausalito, who was the lead veterinarian for the rescue team. "This was the first time antibiotics have been administered to free swimming whales in the wild, and was made possible by generous donations from Pfizer, Bayer and Grandpa's Compounding Pharmacy, and the development of a new custom made remote delivery device by PAXARMS to successfully administer the medicine. The antibiotics will help the animals fight infections and enhance their recovery from the wounds they sustained from a vessel collision." The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Marine Fisheries Service, The Marine Mammal Center in Sausalito, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), California Department of Fish and Game (DFG), and the Governor's Office of Emergency Services (OES) established a unified command to monitor and assist the whales, coordinate rescue operations, and ensure their safety and of the public and rescue team members. "We are extremely grateful for the tremendous outpouring of support that we received from our partners and the local communities from San Francisco to Sacramento who helped these whales," said Dr. Teri Rowles, Director of NOAA's Marine Mammal Health and Stranding Response Program. "A number of veterinarians and marine mammal biologist were on scene to provide their expertise and assistance, and we consulted with numerous experts around the world on this case. The strong partnerships between the federal, state and local authorities and non-profit organizations allowed us to not only assist these whales, but to also collect scientific information that will help support the conservation and recovery of marine mammals in California and elsewhere." Rescue operations included utilizing DFG, Solano County Sheriff's Department, NOAA's Southwest Regional Office, and USCG boats to maintain a 500-yard perimeter around the whales to minimize disturbance of the whales and potential collisions with the whales. In addition, a 1,000-foot temporary flight restriction was established to further prevent disturbance of the whales. Ferry, tug, and other vessel operators were provided up-to-date information on the whales' position throughout this event so that operators could travel safely through areas. Timeline May 13 -- Whales were first observed near Benicia. May 14 - Whales were spotted further inland in the Sacramento River Delta near Rio Vista. May 15 -- 19 -- Whales made their way up the shipping channel to the Port of Sacramento turning basin and circled in the area for several days. Scientists made efforts to lure the whales out toward the Pacific Ocean using underwater broadcasts of humpback whale feeding and socialization sounds. May 20 - Starting at 2:30 p.m. and extending for more than 6 hours, the whales traveled approximately 25 miles down the Sacramento Channel to the Rio Vista area. The whales started their trek down the river after two tugs moved down the channel to assist a commercial vessel. May 21 - 26 - The whales remained north of the Rio Vista Bridge for 5 days. Efforts were made to herd the whales using pipe-banging (Oikami) and other sounds. Scientists took a skin sample of the female whale. Because the animals were in fresh water for a long time, biologists became increasingly concerned about the health of the whales especially after observing deterioration of their skin condition and wounds. For these reasons, on Saturday, May 26, the animal care team administered antibiotics to both the mother whale and her calf. This was the first time antibiotics were administered to free-swimming large whales in the wild. May 27 - One week after the initial movement south, the whales passed under the Rio Vista bridge around 1:30 pm and traveled approximately 25 miles toward the ocean,
F/V Miss Kathy, a 54 foot shrimp trawler grounded west of Sebastian Inlet.  Minor release of diesel occurred.  1100 gallons still onboard. [SEP] USCG Sector Miami advises all the fuel and oily water has been removed from the vessel. The fuel had been free floating inside the vessel and a minor amount (est 10 gal) was released. The fuel inside the vessel saturated the wood of the boat and attempts to pressure wash this were not successful. USCG is awaiting approval to dispose of the veassel at this time. Resources at risk in the area include seagrass beds, pelicans, and manatee. No further SSC support is requested.
USCG received notification from boaters of 50-100 55 gallon plastic drums floating 6 miles off Port Everglades, FL.  USCG has not confirmed the actual number of drums or the contents, but report there is a fuel odor near the drums that were examined. [SEP] USCG located the owner of the drums who recovered them. Case closed.
52 foot motor vessel with 600 gal of diesel on board grounded in Saphire Bay which is between Red Hook Pt and Red Bay in ST THOMAS, USVI [SEP] USCG Sector San Juan notified of the grounding of the M/V Fifty-First Lady in Saphire Bay, St Thomas, USVI. This is located between Red Hook Pt and Red Bay. No Lat Long was available at time of notification. Vessel has 600 gallons of diesel on board in two tanks. No pollution is reported at this time. Vessel is on rock bottom with reportedly no coral. No additional SSC support is being requested at this time. SSC Bradford Benggio [SEP] USCG reports vessel was refloated on April 25 2007 and case was closed. No pollution was reported.
35 foot sailing vessel grounded at Coakley Bay on North shore of St Croix, USVI [SEP] USCG informed that the vessel was pulled off the rocky bottom and now rests anchored on sand bottom adjacent to the grounding site. The boat will be towed into a nearby marina in the morning. NOAA SSC: Bradford Benggio
Phosphate cargo ship lost power and grounded 400 yards east of the Skyway Bridge in Tampa Bay. [SEP] USCG reports that as of 1315 the vessel was successfully refloated and is now tied up at Port Manatee. No pollution occurred.
100' ferry grounded about 1/2 mile offshore.  Location is about 2 miles SE ofCharlotte Amalie Harbor.Potential spill. [SEP] Photo by USCG [SEP] On Saturday, 17 March 2007, the NOAA ERD Duty Officer notified the Scientific Support Coordinator of a grounded vessel in the U.S. Virgin Islands. The 100' ferry, AMERICAN PRIDE, has grounded about 1/2 mile off the entrance to St. Thomas Harbor (off Charlotte Amalie). The location is reported as 18?? 18.75' N by 64?? 55.199' W. No oil has been spilled. There is a potential of about 1,000 gallons of diesel fuel on the ferry. The USCG requested a trajectory and weather forecast. A Resources at Risk Analysis (RAR) was also provided. In addition to the natural resources typical of this region, there are two drinking water intakes that may be at risk should there be a spill. Dissolution and natural dispersion of diesel into the water column near the intakes may result in a tainted or contaminated water. There is a water intake for a desalinization plant for the Frenchmans Reef Hotel at Muhenfels Point, which would be at significant risk in the event of a release. This information along with the requested trajectory and forecast was provided to the USCG. The Coast Guard reported that the goal of the response was to remove the vessel this evening if possible to avoid approaching rougher seas that could result in additional damage to the ferry and a possible release of the diesel. NOAA remains in a standby posture to support the USCG on this response. [SEP] Photo by USCG [SEP] Location [SEP] The RP submitted a salvage plan to the USCG that entailed using a crane onboard a barge to help lift the vessel from the grounded position into the water. The operation was attempted today, but was unsuccessful. The RP indicated that sea conditions of 3-4 feet inhibited the safe operation and the attempt was aborted. Weather forecasts indicate similar conditions for the next 3-4 days. Meanwhile CG is verifying compliance with required safety documentation and certification for the crane that has been hired. [SEP] Vessel aground on reef/rocks [SEP] The ESI map and associated tables are attached in a low-resolution scale to keep the file size small. The map shows the location of the two water intakes that are close to the grounding site. The water intake symbol is an open water drop inside a circle. [SEP] Dr Currubba, thank-you for this information. I'm glad you are involved locally. USCG still needs to work with the designated federal trustees as well. That is myself for DOC (NOAA) and Gregory Hogue for DOI. THis is as per the NCP. Thanks for coordinating with me and please let me know if I can assist further from either a resource trustee perspective or as the Scientific Support Coordinator. One other consideration, as Felix is well aware, is to avoid additional physical impact with improper use of lines and excessive prop wash during the salvage. Thanks, Brad lisamarie carrubba wrote: > Using the 2004 aerial photographs of St. Thomas flown by PR DNER and the NOAA 2001 benthic habitat maps, I made these two figures for everyone to look at to assist in evaluating the benthic resources in the area of the grounding. I used the coordinates provided by the Coast Guard as a more-or-less estimate of where the vessel is grounded. Note that, based on personal experience snorkeling this area, it's rock colonized by some hard and soft corals, sponges, macroalgae, etc. with seagrass between the rock pinnacles. I have not seen acroporid corals in this area in the past. > After consulting with Felix, the concerns of NOAA Fisheries and U.S. Fish and Wildlife would be coral colony and seagrass damage during salvage related to anchoring of salvage vessel(s) and tow cables. We recommend using the path the vessel entered the reef to do the removal as much as possible to avoid cutting additional paths through the coral and other species on the rock reef. Also, given the condition of the vessel, we would recommend that, as soon as the vessel is floated off the reef (assuming this proves to be possible based on Sea Tow's surveys), it be placed on a barge or secured with additional flotation devices that lash it together to avoid it breaking up and sinking over seagrass beds. > > Dr. Lisamarie Carrubba > NOAA Fisheries Service > Caribbean Field Office > > > > [SEP] Local FWS reported that the vessel remains aground and weather and sea conditions were still unfavorable for salvage operations. [SEP] vessel aground on reef/rocks [SEP] provided by nmfs [SEP] Photo by USCG
Grounded 700' vessel.  No release. [SEP] Map [SEP] Tidal Heights at Norton Point, Gravesend Bay, New York Harbor, NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY Station No. 1277 Latitude: 40?? 35.40' N Longitude: 73?? 59.90' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:01 Low Water +00:03 High water height difference: (*1.02+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.15+0.0) Based on SANDY HOOK (calculated from constituent data) From Sat Mar 17, 2007 to Wed Mar 21, 2007 (5 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Tue Mar 20, 2007; 08:49 pm; 6.2ft Lowest Tide - Mon Mar 19, 2007; 02:04 pm; -1.1ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 03/17/2007 06:02 +5.6 High Sat 12:33 -0.6 Low 18:29 +5.4 High ------------------------------------------------------- 03/18/2007 00:53 -0.7 Low Sun 06:51 +5.9 High 13:19 -0.9 Low 19:15 +5.8 High ------------------------------------------------------- 03/19/2007 01:45 -0.9 Low Mon 07:38 +5.9 High 14:04 -1.1 Low 20:01 +6.1 High ------------------------------------------------------- 03/20/2007 02:36 -1.0 Low Tue 08:26 +5.8 High 14:49 -1.1 Low 20:49 +6.2 High ------------------------------------------------------- 03/21/2007 03:25 -1.0 Low Wed 09:16 +5.5 High 15:33 -0.9 Low 21:39 +6.1 High [SEP] WEATHER FORECAST FOR Lower Bay, NY Harbor 0200 EST March 18, 2007 Sunrise (3/18): 0704 EDT Sunset (3/18): 1857 Sunrise (3/19): 0702 Sunset (3/19): 1858 Note: Small craft advisory is in effect from 0800 Sunday through Sunday evening. +++++++++++++++++++++ WINDS: Saturday night: 15 - 20 knots from W Sunday : 15 - 20 knots from W Sunday night: 10 - 15 knots from W Monday: 10 - 15 knots from W Monday afternoon: 15 - 20 knots from SW SEAS: Saturday night: 3 - 6 feet Sunday : 3 - 5 feet Sunday night: 2 - 4 feet Monday: 2 - 4 feet Monday afternoon: 3 - 5 feet EXTENDED OUTLOOK: Monday night S winds 20 - 25 knots becoming SW 15 - 20 after midnight. Seas 3 - 5 feet Tuesday W winds 10 - 15 knots, seas 3 - 5 feet. Wednesday NE winds 10 - 15 knots, seas 2 - 4 feet. [SEP] Sector NY was notified at 180219Z March 07 of outbound container ship KOBE EXPRESS losing propulsion in the area of Buoy 19 in Ambrose Channel, New York Harbor. Vessel dropped anchor to cease drifting and avoid grounding. Vessel regained engines, attempted to move further into the channel but was unable to. Vessel ran aground at this time. Six tugs attempted to free vessel with no success. It was determined that cause of engine failure was due to water being present in fuel. Fuel was received in Hong Kong. Vessel was later refloated at high tide and proceeded to Gravesend Bay Anchorage. Dive survey was conducted noting only minor paint scrapes. Fuel was recycled through a purifier. Vessel was deemed fit for service by COTP. Vessel departed later on in the evening on March 07. Case closed. [SEP] Tidal Currents at Norton Point, WSW of, NEW YORK HARBOR ENTRANCE Station No. 3681 Meter Depth: 16 feet Latitude: 40?? 33.30' N Longitude: 74?? 1.30' W Maximum Flood Direction: 341?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 166?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood -00:03 Flood -01:02 Minimum Before Ebb +00:18 Ebb +00:20 Flood Speed Ratio: 0.60 Ebb Speed Ratio: 0.70 Based on THE NARROWS (calculated from constituent data) From Sat Mar 17, 2007 to Wed Mar 21, 2007 (5 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 03/17/2007 02:22 +0.0 Min Before Flood Sat 04:17 +1.3 Max Flood 08:39 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 11:56 -1.8 Max Ebb 14:51 +0.0 Min Before Flood 16:41 +1.2 Max Flood 21:03 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/18/2007 00:22 -1.7 Max Ebb Sun 03:11 +0.0 Min Before Flood 05:03 +1.4 Max Flood 09:25 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 12:38 -1.8 Max Ebb 15:32 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:22 +1.3 Max Flood 21:47 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/19/2007 01:07 -1.8 Max Ebb Mon 03:58 +0.0 Min Before Flood 05:48 +1.4 Max Flood 10:09 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 13:21 -1.8 Max Ebb 16:13 +0.0 Min Before Flood 18:03 +1.3 Max Flood 22:31 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/20/2007 01:53 -1.8 Max Ebb Tue 04:45 +0.0 Min Before Flood 06:34 +1.3 Max Flood 10:54 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 14:05 -1.7 Max Ebb 16:54 +0.0 Min Before Flood 18:47 +1.3 Max Flood 23:18 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/21/2007 02:39 -1.7 Max Ebb Wed 05:35 +0.0 Min Before Flood 07:24 +1.2 Max Flood 11:41 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 14:50 -1.6 Max Ebb 17:38 +0.0 Min Before Flood 19:35 +1.2 Max Flood
Dead  Right Whale found off Cape Hatteras.Question is where could it have come from [SEP] For information purposes, I am including the following information to illustrate how ERD's involvement in this incident assists other NOAA line offices: On April 20, the Marine Mammal Health and Stranding Response Program of NMFS asked Emergency Response Division (ERD) staff to apply trajectory model to perform a hindcast for a dead right whale, an animal born this year. A hindcast is a trajectory analysis ran in reverse used to forecast the probable area of a previous location. In this case, fisheries scientists predicted the juvenile right whale died 3-4 days before April 20. Based on the hindcast, the right whale was predicted to have died south of Cape Hatteras. [SEP] Hey Bushy! I was wondering if you could swing another hindcast for us (go One NOAA!). I also wanted to ask you if we're getting on your nerves or taking you away from other work? I don't know if these are interesting conundrums for you or have become a hassle. Please feel free to let us know if we're taking away too many of your resources. If you DO have the time, we're talking about another right whale, an animal born this year. The position I have is 35.3479N x 75.19664W at 0915 hours, eastern time on March 31. The animal likely had a windage of 1 m above the waterline, and it was estimated to be dead for 3-4 days. If possible, I'm sure my higher-ups would prefer to extend the cast to 2 to 5 or 6 days dead. I'm working on getting you a position from later in the day in case that will help, but things were a little confusing that day, so I'm not sure what I'll be able to turn up. Give me a shout if you have any questions or concerns or just want to shoot the breeze. :-) Thanks! -Liz
NOAA was notified on 11 March 2007 of a tug striking a wellhead platform resulting in a 15 to 20 foot spray of oil.  Fortunately, the incident only involved a connecting flow line that was cut by the tug's prop and not a wild well blowout.  An employee of the company that manages the well observed the incident and was able to access the platform and secure the line by shutting in an isolation valve.  As a result, what could have been a much larger problem was quickly minimized to a small spill.  NOAA has provided consultation to the USCG on the fate and transport of the spilled oil. [SEP] Slick shown moving away from facility and toward the west (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Reported location of wellhead incident (map generated by NOAA). [SEP] Initial Report Shortly after noon on Sunday, 11 March 2007, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of an oil spill in Little Lake, Louisiana. Sometime between 1000 and 1100 hrs (local time), a tug struck a 4-inch flow line coming off of a wellhead operated by Hilcorp Inc. The vessel, BJ 103, is reported to have struck the flow line with the blade of the prop. The damage to the flow line resulted in a 15-20 foot high spray of oil. The wellhead and incident were reported at the following position: 29?? 32.84' N Lat., 090?? 09.78' W Long. in Little Lake. This position places the incident just S of the Bayou Perot incident. The line was shut in shortly after the incident, which significantly reduced the amount of oil lost to the environment. Hilcorp employees witnessed the incident along with other mariners in the area. A Hilcorp employee was able to quickly turn off the valve to the flow line and the duration of the discharge was estimated at only about 15 minutes. The flow line was then bled down and shut in such that there would be no further potential of discharge until repaired. The RP estimates that only 3 bbls of oil was discharged. When OSRO arrived on-scene, they were unable to locate any recoverable oil. A USCG helicopter was diverted to take aerial photographs. During the USCG overflight, the winds were out of the E at 7 knots. The oil slick was observed moving toward the western shore of Little Lake. When first notified, the initial reports were of an uncontrolled well blowout as the result of a barge and tug striking a wellhead platform. D??j?? vu all over again; this was what happened at the wellhead just N of this location in Bayou Perot on 21 Jan. 2007. As is often the case, the initial reports were inaccurate. Initial reports often underestimate the potential threat or release, but for this case... on-scene industry personnel were resolving the problem faster than the communications were reporting the problem to the regulatory and response community. As more information became available, the threat of a major spill dissipated. That said, an unknown amount of oil was released and an investigation is continuing. While the OSRO Team reported no recoverable oil and the overall volume of oil released thought to be relatively low, the USCG plans to follow-up with a second overflight and investigation team. The USCG overflight photographs from earlier the same day exhibited oiling that might persistent through the evening and cause some shoreline impact. The condensate crude oils in this area are often difficult to see atop the dark colored water. The Scientific Support Coordinator worked with the Sector New Orleans to develop assessment tactics and a rough threat area for the follow-up assessment. Fog is expected in the morning, and the winds are expected to make a slight shift to the SE. At present, NOAA is only providing support via telephone and telecommunications. No on-scene deployment is expected. [SEP] Different colors of oil exhibited by the slick, but relatively thick slick or sheen may not be easily visible due to the color of the oil and the dark background color of the water (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Initial Resources at Risk for Upper Little Lake, Louisiana Fate and Behavior of Spill Oil: Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material Condensate crude oil is the oil that is co-produced from a gas well. It is generally a very light crude oil with only minor amounts of the heavier components. The oil may be an emulsion at release due to formation water, however, the emulsion is likely unstable and will break down over time. Emulsified oil will persist as thick slicks that could accumulate against a shoreline in pools or patches After the emulsion breaks, the oil is expected to spread into thin sheens that could penetrate deeply into sparse marsh vegetation patches. Shoreline Resources at Risk: Most of the shoreline of the bayous is characterized as intermediate to brackish salinity marshes. All marsh habitat is sensitive to both oil pollution and collateral physical damage cause by a poorly managed cleanup. Biological Resources at Risk: Fish - A wide range of fish are present. Juvenile fish are usually present all year. In general, juvenile and larval fish are more sensitive to spilled oil than adults. Fish in shallow water areas are more likely to be impacted, due to the potential for a higher concentration of oil in the water column.  Shellfish - Shellfish present in the area include bay squid, blue crab, brown shrimp, pink shrimp, white shrimp, and Gulf stone crab. Juvenile stages of all of these shellfish may also be present in the area. Shellfish in shallow water areas are more likely to be impacted, due to the potential for a higher concentration of oil in the water column. There are oyster leases in Lower Little Lake.  Birds - It is the end of the migratory/overwintering season for waterfowl, but there may still be numerous waterfowl in the marshes and the waters associated with them. Species that may be present include coot, wigeon, gadwall, and ring-necked duck. There are always egrets and herons at the water's edge. In the marshes, there are marsh birds such as clapper rail and marsh wren. Mammals - Raccoon, mink, muskrat, river otter, and nutria may be found throughout the wetlands and inland waters of this area. Oiling of these animals may reduce buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by the fur, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Grooming of oiled fur may also result in ingestion of oil causing irritation, sickness, or death. The light oil may also cause irritation to organs such as the eyes as well as the mucous membranes. Reptiles - American alligator (federally threatened) is found throughout intermediate to freshwater marshes. With the warm temperatures this winter, they may be active. Oil may cause irritation and inflammation of the mucus membranes, especially around the eyes and nostrils, in all of these reptiles. Human-Use Resources at Risk: Jean Lafitte National Heritage Park and Preserve is located along Lake Salvador (north and east of the spill site). [SEP] The USCG reported that no oil was observed on the western and northwestern portion of Little Lake from both an on-water and aerial survey of the area. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up related to the Emergency Response Division's role associated with this incident. This record constitutes the final entry for the response. [SEP] Source of oil spill. Hilcorp platform and wellhead (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Close up of damaged wellhead platform (photo credit, USCG).
An oil spill caused by a pipeline cut during repairs was reported off the Mississippi Delta at South Pass Block 11.  The initial report was only 5 gallons.  Based on subsequent overflights, the estimated volume was increased to 9 bbls.  Trajectory support has been requested by the USCG. [SEP] Observed heavier oil portion of slick (credit RP's Spill Management Team, O'Brien's). Photograph shows a patch of broken brown oil. [SEP] Initial Report, 6 March 2007 On the morning of 6 March 2007, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of an oil spill in South Pass Block 11. At that time, the report was of a 5 gallon spill from an 8 inch pipeline. The report was of a cut in the pipeline while divers were conducting repairs at approximately 0200 hrs the same morning. Subsequent overflights reported a larger incident then that initially reported. The pipeline is operated by Energy Partners Inc. The source was reported located at 29?? 2.32' N Lat. 089?? 16.72' W Long. Boom was deployed at the source. First Overflight Report, 0900 hrs The RPs Spill Management Team conducted an overflight an estimate a total of 9 BBLS discharged. The observer reported that the sheen split into two leading edges (like a fork in the road). First leading edge was at 28?? 53.79' N Lat. 089?? 19.54' W Long. The second leading edge was located at 28?? 54.29' N Lat. 089?? 18.69' W Long. The trailing edge was located at 29?? 01.51' N Lat. 089?? 16.14' W Long. The observer stated the sheen has 80% coverage in the affected area (75% to 80% was silver sheen). Second Overflight Report, 1315 hrs The afternoon overflight reported the leading edge at 28?? 45.33' N Lat. 089?? 33.34' W. Long. The heaviest Slick was reported at 28?? 57.81' N Lat. 089?? 21.84' W Long. The USCG has requested a trajectory analysis and is planning a follow-up overflight in the morning. A USCG Pollution Investigation team will also be onsite in the morning. This is all of the information that is currently available at the time the report was generated. [SEP] On 6 March, the USCG conducted an overflight of the South Pass 11 incident. At the source (29?? 02.43'N, 089?? 16.82'W), the USCG observers reported a Jack-up barge and hard boom containing a small pocket of oil. This was the location where the divers had cut into an 8" pipeline containing oil. An unconfirmed reported stated that the divers may have cut into the wrong line since there were two lines in the same area. The well and pipelines were reported shut in and pipe was isolated with blocking valves. The leading edge of the sheen was reported as 28?? 45.33'N Lat. 089?? 30.34' W Long. At the time of the overflight, the sheen was an estimated 19 miles long and about 1/2 to 3/4 of a mile wide. The USCG observers estimated a 65%-70% coverage. Approximately 90% of the slick was light to silver sheen, and the remaining slick, approximately 10%, was emulsified oil. These estimates are consistent with after another overflight conducted by the RP. Most of the oil and the sheen dimensions seemed to be following along the convergence zone. The USCG investigated what was thought could be oil at or near the shoreline. The observers reported no oil impacting the shoreline, but did observe a few pockets of emulsified oil floating about 300' off shore and along the shoreline (this was latter determined to be organic detrital material and not oil). [SEP] South Pass Block 11 Spill, Louisiana 1730 CDT, Tuesday March 6, 2007 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (3/6): 1803 CDT Sunrise (3/7): 0620 CDT Sunset (3/7): 1803 CDT 36-Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight through tomorrow morning, the winds are expected to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Tomorrow, SE winds at 5-10 knots are forecast, becoming S-SE at 5 knots overnight. _________________________ Waves: Tonight through tomorrow, the seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through tomorrow, no precipitation is forecast. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, clear skies are predicted. Tomorrow, mostly sunny skies are forecast. Tomorrow night, clear skies are expected. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from daytime highs near 70 to overnight lows in the mid 40's tonight to the low 50's tomorrow night. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday: NE winds at 5-10 knots are predicted. Seas 1-2 feet. Partly cloudy skies are forecast, with no precipitation expected. Friday: E winds at 10 knots are expected, becoming E at 10-15 knots overnight. Seas 1-2 feet. Partly cloudy skies are forecast, with no precipitation expected. Saturday: SE winds at 10-15 knots. Seas 2-3 feet. Partly cloudy skies with a chance of showers and thunderstorms. Sunday: E winds at 10-15 knots. Seas 2-3 feet. Mostly cloudy skies with a chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Map showing the reported position of the pipeline release. [SEP] Observed oil slick (credit RP's Spill Management Team, O'Brien's). Photograph shows mostly silver sheen extending far into the distance toward the horizon. [SEP] Date: 18 CDT March 6, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry  FROM: NOAA/NOS Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: South Pass Block 11 Spill FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of a spill that occurred last night. These notes are based on the following information: A spill from an 8" pipeline was reported last night (see position listing below). Overflights at 0900 and 1315 have tracked the slick. Source location: 29 deg 02.32'N, 089 deg 16.72'W 0900 Overflight (80% coverage; 75% of coverage was silver sheen: 28 deg 53.79'N, 089 deg 19.54'W leading edge 1 28 deg 54.29'N, 089 deg 19.69'W leading edge 2 29 deg 01.51'N ,089 deg 16.14'N trailing edge 1315 Overflight: 28 deg 45.33'N, 089 deg 33.34' W leading edge 28 deg 57.81'N, 089 deg 21.84'W heaviest concentration If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Wind tonight are forecast to be from the east at 5-10 knots through Wednesday morning. Wednesday afternoon winds are expected to shift to be from the SE at 5-10 knots, then overnight from the south to southeast at 5 knots. 2)Trajectory Heavier concentrations of oil could beach on the eastern outside edge of Southwest Pass overnight. In seaching for the remaining oil tomorrow, we suggest the following: A. Search from the source sight out along the eastern outside edge of Southwest Pass to just beyond the afternoon leading edges visualized yesterday (out from Southwest Pass to 28 deg 40'N.). B. No need to search farther east than the longitude of the source (089 deg 16.72'W). C. Search as far west as 89 deg 45' N as the currents and winds from the east could move the oil westward. D. Search as far north as 29 deg N outside of Southwest Pass, as the currents can turn northward in this area. [SEP] Source with boom (credit RP's Spill Management Team, O'Brien's). Photograph shows jack-up barge at the site of the release. Gas can be seen bubbling from subsurface and there is oil captured in the boom. [SEP] The USCG reported that shoreline assessment has been conducted on the East side of South West Pass North of the cut. No oil was observed impacting this shoreline. What was thought to be small pockets of oil approaching the beach were actually organic material and muddy water. The RP was to conduct another overflight on the evening of 7 March to assess the section of beach between the cut and the jetty at South West Pass on the East side. An OSRO response team will remain on standby in case any shoreline impact can be identified and until the threat of release has been removed. Oil trapped in the mud near the source will likely be released when the area is disturbed during the repair process; therefore, containment boom will remain around this area until operations are completed. It was reported that some of the planned sediment jetting activities will be to purposely free any trapped oil such that it can be recovered in the boom. The CGA Response Vessel GRAND BAY is on-scene to recovery any oil released to open water. Unless there are future reports of oil stranding that would constitute active cleanup or subsequent releases that would threaten the coastal environment, this entry will constitute a final incident report.
Grounded 712' Coal Carrier that was outbound.Unknown amount of fuel oil.Grounded in soft mud.No reported damage, no reported spill.At high tide on Thursday, about 1430 EST, an attempt will be made to pullthe vessel free. [SEP] As of this morning, reloading of the coal onto the M/V Montrose was completed without incident. The USCG has stood down. No further involvement by NOAA expected. Case closed. [SEP] Spoke to USCG this morning to get update on M/V Montrose. As you know the vessel was refloated yesterday morning and brought to a deepwater anchorage where it underwent an dive inspection. Other than some minor scraps and scratches on the external hull, there was no external or internal damage. Reloading of the coal onto the M/V Montorse began yesterday afternoon and is still going on. It is expected that vessel will be fully loaded early Friday morning then it will be underway to next port. Cause of incident under USCG investigation. [SEP] X marks the spot [SEP] The M/V Montrose was successfully re-floated at 0740 today. No signs of any oil pollution. The ship is currently in the channel heading south to rhe anchorage at Solomon Island. A dive survey is scheduled for 1300 today. Following the dive survey the approx. 7100 tons of coal will be reloaded. [SEP] USCG Photo of lightering barge being positioned next to the freighter M/V Montrose [SEP] From the vessel owners website: http://www.seaarland.at/montrose.htm [SEP] Thursday, March 01, 2007 1700 hours USCG made several attempts to remove M/V Montrose from grounding site, but vessel failed to budge. USCG has requested ship owner and insurance company to prepare salvage plan to offload coal and fule oil. USCG expects that it will require 24-48 hours to prepare and approve salvage plan. USCG has begun to mobilize boom and other response equipment. NOAA ERD has been providing trajectory, weather and tide information. [SEP] http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/data_menu.shtml?stn=8575512+Annapolis,+MD&type=OFS&ofs=cbofs Water level prediction for Annapolis. This station was recommended by Peter Stone. Note the current water levels are well below normal tide predictions, but water levels are expected to return close to normal by Wednesday afternoon as winds change direction. [SEP] M/V MONTROSE, CHESAPEAKE BAY 1700 EDT March 2, 2007 This is a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (3/2): 1759 EDT Sunrise (3/3): 0635 EDT Sunset (3/3): 1800 EDT 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This evening: winds SW at 15-2 knots. Tonight: (after midnight) SW 10-15 knots. Saturday morning: SW 20-25 knots with gusts to 30 knots. Saturday afternoon: SW 20-25 knots with gusts to 30 knots. Saturday night: W 15-20 knots. Waves: Tonight: seas are expected to be 2-3 feet. Saturday morning: seas are forecast to be 3-5 feet. Saturday afternoon: seas are predicted to be 4-5 feet. Saturday night: seas are expected to be 2-4 feet. Precipitation: Tonight: dry. Saturday: isolated showers with a chance of snow Saturday night. Temperatures: Low's in the mid 30's. High in the upper 40's. Extended Forecast: Sunday, winds from the W at 15-20 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Seas 2-3 feet. Monday, winds from the W at 15-20 knots. Mostly clear skies. Seas 2-3 feet. [SEP] Date: February 28, 2007 To: NOAA SSC Frank Csulak  FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: M/V Montrose, Chesapeake Bay south of Baltimore FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a potential spill from a grounded coal carrier. These notes are based on the following information: The 712' coal carrier M/V Montrose is grounded approx. 32 nm south of Baltimore Harbor at 38 deg 37.792'N, 076 deg 24.387'W. The vessel if reported to be grounded in mud and is not leaking any fuel at this time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Light winds are forecast tonight increasing near dawn tomorrow (Thursday) to be from the East at 5-10 knots. During the morning hours the winds are expected to increase to be from the East at 15 knots by late morning. By afternoon the winds are predicted to be from the SE at 20 knots, increasing to be from the SE at 25 knots with gusts to 35 knots overnight. 2) TRAJECTORY Any oil released from the vessel will move with the tides and the winds. An overnight release under light wind conditions would move primarily with the currents, as far as 2 nm per tide cycle either toward Baltimore (flood tide) or out toward the entrance (ebb tide scenario). As the winds increase from the E and then SE, the winds will begin to dominate the oil's movement within the bay, causing the oil to beach on the western shore. Any oil released in the next 24 hours would be expected to beach within 6 nm in either direction from the grounding site on the western shore of the bay. If a release occurs, please contact your SSC immediately for a more detailed trajectory forecast. [SEP] MV Montrose, Chesapeake Bay 1000 EDT March 1, 2007 This is a site specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (3/1): 1858 EDT Sunrise (3/2): 0737 EDT Sunset (3/2): 1859 EDT  36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today SE 15-20 knots gusts to 25 knots. This evening (est. 1900 hrs) SE 20-25 knots gusts to 35 knots. Tonight (after midnight) S 20-25 gusts to 35 knots. Tomorrow mid-morning NW 20-25 gusts to 35 knots. Waves: Today small craft advisory. Tonight after 1900 hrs through tomorrow 1400-1500 hrs Gale warning. Precipitation: Today 30% chance of rain. Tonight 100% chance of rain. Early tomorrow morning 60% chance of rain. Tomorrow mid-morning 20% chance of rain. Tomorrow after 1300 hrs 0%chance of rain. Ceiling/Visibility: Today ceilings 10,000-20,000 feet with visibility 5 miles. Overnight (est. 0300 hrs) ceilings 500 feet with visibility 4-5 mi with local areas of 1-2 miles in showers and thunderstorms. Tomorrow morning (est. 0600-1000 hrs) ceilings still 500 ft with visibility 3 miles. Tomorrow afternoon after 1500 ceilings 1,000 feet with visibility 5miles. Temperatures: High temperatures today mid 40s F. Low temperatures tonight low 40s F. High temperatures tomorrow 50 F. Extended Forecast - Days 3-5: Winds SW 10-15 through Saturday with minimal precipitation. [SEP] MARCH 5, 2007 OPERATIONS UNDERWAY TO RE-FLOAT MONTROSE BALTIMORE - Operations are underway in an effort to re-float the 712-foot Liberian flagged cargo ship Montrose currently aground in the Chesapeake Bay, west of the Choptank River. Crews under the direction of the Unified Command began the process known as "lightering" Sunday afternoon at approximately 3 p.m. Since then, approximately 4,800 tons of coal have been transferred from the ship to an attached barge. If weather permits, crews on-scene anticipate having the coal of the Montrose transferred to nearby barges by Tuesday around 6 a.m. When the coal transfer evolution is complete, a process known as de-ballasting will begin. De-ballasting is the removal of water that was used to keep the ship stable during the lightering process. Attempts to re-float the Montrose are scheduled to begin at approximately 4 p.m. Tuesday, weather permitting. Once afloat, the ship will be taken to a safe anchorage where it will undergo an underwater dive inspection. The Unified Command consists of the Coast Guard, ECM Maritime Services, Resolve Marine Group, Maryland Natural Resources Police, Maryland Department of Natural Resources, Maryland Department of the Environment, and Motia Navigation who is the operator of the Montrose.
During the USCG managed, FEMA directed mission to remove debris and hazards from selected Commercially Navigated Waterways impacted by Hurricane Katrina, a barge was discovered containing drums identified as Paraquat near Port Eads. Louisiana.  Port Eads is just off South Pass in the Mississippi Delta and adjacent to Pass A Loutre Wildlife Management Area.  At this time, it is not known if the drums contain any chemical. [SEP] Photograph of one of the paraquat drums (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Poor weather, fog and winds, last week forced a cancellation of the barge and drum assessment by the USCG Gulf Strike Team. The barge is located in a very remote area. The USCG is investigating the use of a larger platform from which to make the assessment (one less subject to poor weather such as a crew boat). Will update when information is available. The situation at the barge itself is reported as stable, and the barge is located in a very remote location. NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator is standing by awaiting the initial results of the Hazard Assessment. [SEP] As part of the Post-Hurricane Katrina USCG Salvage and Debris project, the USCG responded under FEMA funding to this discovery. A HAZMAT contractor was secured and the drums were removed and segregated. It would appear that a total of 475 Paraquat labeled drums were being used as additional floatation in the barge. All of the drums were marked Poison and Do Not Reuse. Once removed, most of the drums were also identified by paint stenciling as having been rinsed in the 1980's. To insure public safety and proper disposal, the drums were segregated into damaged and intact. Most of the intact drums contained some liquid residue. Approximately 20 drums were sampled and analyzed. The preliminary results indicated that all of the drums contained some level of Paraquat contamination, but the concentrations were below 1 ppm (most of the drums were in the low ppb). Once the final chemistry report is provided to the USCG, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator will assist in reviewing the data and coordinating final disposal plans. The preliminary plan is that the residue will be collected for treatment, and the drums will be shredded and disposed of in a regulated landfill. Given that all indications are that there is no significant environmental or public health threat identified at present, this entry will constitute the Final Report. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator will continue to assist the USCG as part of on-going support to the USCG Salvage and Debris Team. [SEP] Initial Report During the USCG managed, FEMA directed mission to remove debris and hazards from selected Commercially Navigated Waterways impacted by Hurricane Katrina, a barge was discovered containing drums identified as Paraquat near Port Eads. Louisiana. Port Eads is just off South Pass in the Mississippi Delta and adjacent to Pass A Loutre Wildlife Management Area. It is not known if the drums contain any chemical or if they were simply reused for floatation in the barge. Given the potential hazard and clear stamping on the containers that state that the drums are not to be rinsed or reused, the barge is being treated as a suspected HAZMAT threat. It is thought that there may be 30 or more drums in the wreaked barge. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator is working with the USCG to develop an assessment and disposal plan.  Paraquat is highly toxic to humans and animals and has serious and irreversible delayed effects if absorbed. As little as one teaspoonful of the active ingredient is fatal. Death occurs up to 30 days after ingestion. Absorbed paraquat is distributed via the bloodstream to practically all areas of the body. The lungs selectively accumulate paraquat, and therefore contain higher concentrations than other tissues. When in the lungs, paraquat develops into pulmonary oedema and other lung damage leading to fibrosis. Liver damage occurs and renal failure may follow as the kidneys remove absorbed paraquat. During the late 1960s, a controversial program sponsored by the US government sprayed paraquat on marijuana fields in South America creating concerns that smoking cannabis that has been sprayed with paraquat may cause "serious, sometimes irreversible lung damage. Although no longer available in the United States as a pure product, paraquat carries the greatest morbidity and mortality among ingested herbicides. Paraquat is still a major cause of death and disability in some countries, such as Australia, and it was responsible for at least four deaths from acute poisoning in the United States in 1996. Because paraquat is highly poisonous, the form of it that was commonly marketed in the United States is reported to have a blue dye added to keep it from being confused with a beverage. Paraquat from outside the United States may not have such safeguards. [SEP] Photograph of one of the paraquat drums (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Approx. location of the wreaked barge containing drums marked as paraquat.
NOAA Weather Service Notified Hazmat of a natural gas leak in Bethune, SC during early morning of 16 February, 2007. [SEP] 6:50 am | Gas leak shuts U.S. 1 in Kershaw Co. STEVE LYTTLE slyttle@charlotteobserver.com A civil emergency warning has been issued by officials in Kershaw County following reports of a natural gas leak in the northern South Carolina county. The gas leak has forced authorities to close a portion of U.S. 1, the major route between Columbia and the Richmond County/Fayetteville area. The gas leak was reported about 5:30 a.m. near U.S. 1, about 2 miles northeast of the town of Bethune. That is about 60 miles southeast of Charlotte and about 15 miles south of Pageland, S.C. Authorities are advising residents in and near Bethune, especially on the north side of town, to remain indoors until the leak is repaired. Residents are advised to close their doors and windows and turn off heating systems. The sheriff's office in Kershaw County said no evacuations have been ordered so far this morning. [SEP] Gas leak contained in Kershaw County Friday, February 16, 2007 BEHTUNE, S.C. - Workers contained a natural gas leak about two hours after a line ruptured in northeastern Kershaw County early Friday, emergency officials said. No injuries were reported. A break in the line about two miles northeast of here was reported shortly after 5 a.m., said Tess Catoe, a supervisor at the Kershaw County communications center. No evacuations were ordered, but residents had been told to stay inside and to turn off heating units. A spokeswoman for South Carolina Electric & Gas Co. was gathering information about the incident early Friday. U.S. 1 was closed for a time in the area near the Lynches River bridge and the Chesterfield County line. Bethune Elementary School was to open two hours later than normal because of the problem. A service of the Associated Press(AP)
The NOAA SSC was notified of a pipeline release off South East Pass, LA.  An overflight conducted at 10:50 CST reported a 100 X 20 yard slick.  The second overflight conducted at 13:50 CST reported the leading edge approximately 1.25 miles southwest (230° SW). [SEP] Reports from the USCG overflight state that the reported source is no longer leaking and no impact to shoreline were observed. The USCG is also conducting a water patrol. Based on this information and the scale of the original report and photographs, this will constitute a final report unless significant oiling is observed by the water survey. [SEP] Traj Map4 [SEP] One of the photographs of the slick taken on 6 Feb. A series of four photographs were provided, and all were very simular to this picture (photo credit, Air Logistics). Based on the initial slick size and the report that the source had stopped, the threat may be low. The results from the USCG overflight have not been reported. [SEP] Traj Map2 [SEP] MYSTERY SPILL, SOUTHEAST PASS, LA 1500 CST, Tuesday February 06, 2007 Sunset (02/06): 1742 Sunrise (02/07): 0647 Sunset (02/07): 1742 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, the winds are forecast to be from the E to SE at 5-10 knots becoming light and variable late tonight. Wednesday, the winds are expected to be light and variable with a SE component. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, no precipitation is forecast in the region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Wednesday, partly cloudy skies are expected. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the mid 60's to lows in the lower 50's. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, E-SE winds at 5-10 knots are predicted. Partly cloudy skies. No precipitation is expected. Friday, N winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of scattered showers are expected. Saturday, N to NE winds at 15-20 knots are forecast. Partly sunny skies. Scattered showers. [SEP] Trajectory Map1 [SEP] On Tuesday, 7 February 2007, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of an oil release near the Mississippi Delta off Louisiana. At 1230 an Air Logistics pilot reported a black oil slick 100yds by 20yds and it appeared to be bubbling from below the surface of the water, but that it did stop shortly after spotting. He originally spotted it around 1050 at Lat 29 4' 19", Long 089 0' 08" which would put it in the South Pass 60/17 area. The same pilot flew over the spill area again at 1350 and stated that it had moved from its original position approximately 1.25 miles at a heading of 230 degrees. At the request of the USCG, NOAA provided a trajectory. USCG will be flying the location of reported oil slick today. [SEP] Traj Map3
On January 21, 2007, the NOAA SSC was notified of a suspected well head or pipeline blowout in Lake Perot, LA.  The source is unconfirmed and may be an abandoned wellhead or pipeline.  There is a significant plume of oil condensate jetting into the air and a trailing plume of brown condensate on the water [SEP] Warmer temperatures are helping to break emulsions, leading to multiple phases and colors of oil along shorelines. NOAA Photograph [SEP] The largest accumulation of free recoverable oil observed during the 6 Mar. 2007 overflight. This location is in Grid 10 and part of Zone 3A. Three Vacuum Recovery Airboat Teams are working this area. Photo credit, NOAA. [SEP] Photograph taken by USCG showing the blowout on 22 Jan. 2007. The height of the spray has been estimated at 30 feet. [SEP] Well platform on 17 July 2007 after being rebuilt (NOAA Photograph). [SEP] Fine, medium, and coarse grades of Bagasse. These materials may be used to treat areas with residual oil after mechanical methods have removed bulk oil. NOAA Photograph [SEP] Cleanup activity in the same area as the overflight photograph on 6 Mar. 2007 (photo credit, NOAA). [SEP] Photograph of a small, approximately 5 foot, Alligator that has been cleaned and is being taken out to be released to the environment (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Recovering marsh vegetation. Note, the water level is much higher than during the response phase on this site visit (NOAA Photograph). [SEP] Final Report On 1 May 2007, LOSCO reported that all of the Zones were in Stage 3. Active cleanup and mainenance complete, and any residual oil trapped in the vegetation was left to natural recovery. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator didn't participate in the final signoff phase, but was briefed by both the state and USCG. The Scientific Support Coordinator was able to make a follow up visit to the site on 17 July 2007. The water level was higher than during the response phase. Most of the area looked good and no residual oiling was observed at the shoreline, but the high water could have biased such observations on that day. Some oil sheen was created by the airboat in shallow water where there was heavy oil contamination during the response phase. This observation was not surprising. Photographs of the wellhead post rebuilding and a section of the marsh on 17 July are provided. This entry serves as the final ResponseLink Report for the Bayou Perot Oil Spill Response. [SEP] Update, 7 March 2007 The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was requested on-scene to participate in an overflight and field cleanup assessment at the Bayou Perot spill site on 6 March. The Operations Section had reported that the cleanup was reaching diminished returns and wanted to discuss endpoints and future cleanup options. Yesterday marked Day 45 of the spill response and cleanup. The first impressions from the floatplane overflight were that very little oil remained (relative to several weeks ago) and that the cleanup had, for the most part, produced minimal collateral damage in the oil-impacted marshes. This statement must be balanced against the large quantity of oil that stranded in these sensitive areas in January. Small pockets of oil were still visible from the air and some collateral impact was observable, but the area essentially looked as if there had only been a small oil spill with sporadic oiling of the marsh and mud flats. The opposite was in fact true. While the previous characterizations are generalizations, they do characterize the overflight portion of the field trip. A large accumulation of stranded oil was being worked by three cleanup teams in Zone 3A (photos are provided in ResponseLink). Sporadic teams were padding up oil in all three remaining cleanup zones, 3A, 3B, and 4. Once on the water and visiting sites by airboat, it was evident that oil pollution was still widely scattered in the spill zone, but most of the remaining oil was patchy distributions of the waxy emulsified yellow oil that had adhered to flats, scarps, and fringing vegetation. On warm days, with available water, some of this oil will mobilize and reoil flats and fringing vegetation. Larger accumulations were recovered (and continue to be recovered) using the Vacuum Recovery Systems. These systems operated from airboats have been highly effective. Given that some of the residual oil doesn't readily migrate from oiled vegetative areas, some oil will be left in the environment for natural recovery. As a side observation, much of the adjacent marsh has recently been burned. The marsh was actually burned during the response activities by the local land manager as part of their marsh management practice. Burned marsh areas restrict the use of airboat activity to prevent collateral damage. All of the marsh operations are being conducted using airboats. The drivers have done an excellent job staying primarily on water and mud flats. This statement is amplified by the fact that the recover team has been operating an average of 30 airboats per day for more than a month and a half. At times, the airboats would cross marsh habitat or rest on marsh for cleanup and recovery. Foot traffic collateral damage has been minimal. If the workers were required to access the marsh, plywood was used to provide a walkway unless the site was highly compacted and stable marsh. There were observations where the fringe of marsh habitat was physically injured and small clumps of exposed vegetation in open areas had been damaged (it would have been impossible to avoid all collateral damage). One negative impact noted, that was again unavoidable, was the incorporation of oil into the sediments by the physical movement of the airboats over mud flats with free scattered oil. The latter observation, along with any physical collateral damage, factors into the point of diminished return on the cleanup operation. As fewer and less contaminated pockets of oil remain, the collateral damage of access must be weighed against benefit. At present, two Vacuum Recovery Systems are working the only remaining large accumulation of oil in Grid M10. The third Vacuum Recovery System was demobed at the end of operations on 6 March. The rest of the teams are conducting recovery of smaller accumulations of oil using sorbents or maintaining passive recover sorbent booms. The present strategy is to continue these operations for the remainder of the week. It is hopeful that the weather may provide another high water event to assess changes in residual oil migration and accumulations before active cleanup is terminated. Either way, the current plan is to shift to a passive recover mode by the middle of next week. The Unified Command is planning to have a SCAT sign-off team make a pass through the area to confirm the strategy and identify any areas where hot-shot teams will be directed to pad up oil that should be recovered prior to the shift to either natural recovery (Stage 3) or passive recovery (Stage 2). The original spill volume was estimated at between 5000 and 6000 bbls once the full damage to the well was known. That value has now been increased to 8,500 bbls only to account for the mass balance of fluids recovered, 8,270 bbls. Given that the release was an uncontrolled wild well release, we will never know the true volume of oil released. In addition, the released oil was already emulsified to between 60 and 70% formation water upon release into the environment. Personnel on-scene: Charlie Henry, Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] From USCG. [SEP] Comparison of a site located in Zone 3A (Grid M10) on Day 8 and Day 45 (photo credit, NOAA).
USCG contacted the NOAA SSC for support on a small pipeline spill in Grand Bay, LA.  The release was discovered and the pipeline was shut in on January 14 (Sunday), but weather conditions prevented a prompt visual assessment. In the event that the release proves larger than initially thought, the USCG has requested weather and trajectory and trajectory support. [SEP] From Brian Folse, ES&H [SEP] GRAND BAY PIPELINE, VENICE, LA 1115 CST, Wednesday January 17, 2007 Sunset (01/17): 1724 Sunrise (01/18): 0657 Sunset (01/18): 1724 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast A small craft advisory is in effect until Wednesday at noon. Today through Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the N at 20-25 knots. Thursday, the winds are forecast to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. _____________________________________ Seas: Today through Tonight, seas are predicted to be 4-6 feet, choppy in protected waters. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Thursday, chance of rain is expected in the region. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high is expected to be in mid to upper 40's and the low in the mid 40's. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Wednesday, cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, winds are forecast to be from the NE at 15-25 knots. Seas, 2-4 feet building to 4-6 feet by the evening hours. Chance of rain expected in the region. Cloudy skies are forecast. Saturday, winds are forecast to be from the NE at 15-25 becoming E at 15-20 knots in the evening hours. Seas, 4-6 feet. Chance of rain is expected in the region. Cloudy skies are forecast. [SEP] Photograph from the USCG overflight of the spill area on 17 Jan. 2007. Photograph shows oil stranded adjacent to marsh vegetation. (photo credit, USCG) [SEP] Harvest Oil & Gas, L.L.C., [SEP] Photograph from the USCG overflight of the spill area on 17 Jan. 2007. Photograph shows emulsified oil pooled adjacent to marsh. (photo credit, USCG) [SEP] GRAND BAY PIPELINE, VENICE, LA 1715 CST, Tuesday January 16, 2007 Sunset (01/16): 1724 Sunrise (01/17): 0657 Sunset (01/17): 1724 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: A small craft advisory is in effect Wednesday at noon. Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the N at 20-25 knots. Wednesday, the winds are forecast to be from the N at 15-20 knots. _____________________________________ Seas: Tonight through Wednesday, seas are predicted to be 4-6 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Wednesday, light showers are expected in the region. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high is expected to be in mid to upper 40's and the low in the mid 40's. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Wednesday, cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, winds are forecast to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Seas, 2-4 feet. Showers are expected in the region. Cloudy skies are forecast. Friday, winds are forecast to be from the NE at 15-25. Seas, 4-6 feet. Showers are expected in the region. Cloudy skies are forecast. [SEP] From Brian Folse, ES&H [SEP] Photograph from the USCG overflight of the spill area on 17 Jan. 2007. Photograph shows broken marsh and boom deployment. The poor boom deployment is a result of a cold front that moved through the area. (photo credit, USCG) [SEP] Photograph from the USCG overflight of the spill area on 17 Jan. 2007. Photograph shows oil pooled adjacent to marsh. (photo credit, USCG) [SEP] There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. [SEP] Incident Update, 18 Jan. 2007 The USCG reports (based on information provided by the RP's Cleanup Contractor) that they have more than 5,000 feet of hard containment boom deployed. The responders have also deployed absorbent boom by airboats. Bird deterrent scare cannons should have also been deployed by the end of the workday yesterday. The current response plan is to allow the marsh to bleed out and then collect the product with drum skimmers (the words of the cleanup contractor, not the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator). The product will be collected into 55 gallon drums and transported from the site by Jon boats. The cleanup contractor currently has 23 people on site. The source of the spill was reported to be a small leak that was discovered over the weekend. The source of the leak has been secured. The cleanup effort has begun, but weather has slowed progress. The following areas are reported oiled and are in the process of being cleaned: 1. Immediately east of the Harvest, Grand Bay Tank Battery #1 there was a 10' x 10' x 3.5' hole in a spoil bank that was filled by both marsh water and oil (Cleanup Zone 1). Oil was noted in the Roseau Cane on the southwest and north sides of the hole. It was later noted that the oil located on the southwest side of the hole traveled to the south side of the Tank Battery #1, and the oil located on the north side of the hole traveled into Roseau Cane further north and into the pond located immediately northeast of the hole. A very minimal amount of oil was located in the dead-end canal leading to the hole in the spoil bank. 2. The vegetation and spoil bank located on the south side of the pond were impacted by residual oil (Zone 2). In Zone 2, it was noted that there were three areas where a decent collection of crude oil had stranded on the spoil bank. 3. The cleanup contractor noted that there was spilled crude oil located on the west side of the pond (Zone 3) stemming from Tank Battery #2 to Zone 1; however; due the shallow water depth in the pond, the work boat utilized for the visual assessment was unable to travel in these waters to investigate. 4. A very minimal amount of oil had also impacted the east side of the pond (Zone 4). 5. Crude oil was located in the Roseau Cane on the east side of the Tank Battery #1 and the west/southwest side of Zone 1 (Zone 5). A portion of this oil was migrating southwest toward the oil field access canal bordering Tank Battery #1. The spill site is located NW of the Delta Wildlife Refuge. Based on observations from a USCG overflight on the afternoon of 17 Jan., its is doubtful that the oil will migrate out of the immediate area of the spill. Cleanup operations will continue. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator is not on-scene, but working with the USCG by phone and telecommunications.
On Dec 30 a Right Whale carcass was reported off southern Georgia.We were asked to estimate where it could have come from.Used winds from NDBC 41012 for winds and current estimates [SEP] Whale trajectory estimate [SEP] Whale photo on 12/30/06
The 44-foot F/V Wahine Kepaloa II grounded off the southern tip of Ni'ihau Island on the night of December 29. The crew was rescued by USCG Barbers Point. An estimated 500 gallons of marine diesel were released from the grounded vessel and approximately 350 gallons of diesel are estimated to remain aboard. The Pacific Environmental Company has been hired to conduct oil removal operations. Weather forecasts and oil fate information were requested. [SEP] COAST GUARD, STATE MONITORING FUEL REMOVAL ON NIIHAU Office of Public Affairs U.S. Coast Guard Press Release Date: Dec. 30, 2006 Contact: Public Affairs (808) 541-2121/2122 COAST GUARD, STATE MONITORING REMOVAL OF FUEL FROM GROUNDED FISHING VESSEL ON NIIHAU HONOLULU - The Coast Guard, the Hawaii State Department of Health and the Robinson family continue to monitor the removal of fuel from a grounded fishing vessel at Kawaihoa Point, on the southern tip of Niihau Friday night. Coast Guard marine safety personnel from Coast Guard Sector Honolulu traveled to the site today to assess the damage to the Wahine Kepaloa II and evaluate the area for fuel removal operations. Pacific Environmental Company has been hired to conduct the oil removal operation. The master of the vessel estimated the vessel had less than 1,000 gallons of fuel aboard at the time of the grounding. [SEP] To: Ruth Yender NOAA SSC December 31, 2006 0700 Hawaii Time FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Weather forecast for small diesel spill off Ni'ihau Island. FORECAST: TODAY: East winds 15-17 kt. Wind waves 5 ft. West-Northwest swell 6 ft. TONIGHT East winds 15 kt. Wind waves 4 ft. West-Northwest swell 6 ft. MONDAY East winds 10-12 kt. Wind waves 4 ft. West-Northwest swell 6-10 ft. TUESDAY Northeast winds 15 kt. Wind waves 4 ft. West-Northwest swell 15 ft. TUESDAY NIGHT Northeast winds 15 kt. Wind waves 5 ft. West-Northwest swell 12 ft. Isolated showers. WEDNESDAY East winds to 25 kt. Wind waves 8 to 10 ft. West-Northwest swell 10 ft. Isolated showers. WEDNESDAY NIGHT East winds to 25 kt., with brief winds to 30 knots. Wind waves 8 to 10 ft. West-Northwest swell 10 ft. Increasing showers THURSDAY Northeast winds to 15-2025 kt. Wind waves 8 to 10 ft. West-Northwest swell 6 ft. Isolated showers. [SEP] Grounded Fishing Vessel Clean Up Completed HONOLULU -- Coast Guard personnel along with experts from the Pacific Environmental Corporation (PENCO) Wednesday completed clean up of oil and hazardous material from the fishing vessel Wahine Kepaloa II, which ran aground Dec. 29 on Ni'ihau. The Coast Guard Pacific Strike Team supervised clean up of diesel water, propane, batteries, refrigerant and other hazardous materials from the 44-foot fishing vessel, which was hard aground near the southeast point of Ni'ihau. The Coast Guard had air lifted two uninjured crewmembers Dec. 29. PENCO used a helicopter with a sling to move nine batteries, two refrigerant cylinders, a propane cylinder and almost 1,000 gallons of watery fuel to an off-shore barge. On the barge, a Coast Guard site safety supervisor ensured proper storage of the hazardous materials. The barrels of waste were labeled and stowed safely in the barge's holding tanks and the barge is due to arrive in Honolulu this afternoon at 5:15 p.m. The Coast Guard worked closely with the State of Hawaii Department of Health and the Robinson family on the recovery operation. The cause of the grounding is still under investigation. [SEP] NOAA consulted with USCG Pacific Strike Team responders on-scene with regard to concerns about potential generation of marine debris from the grounded vessel. USCG responders are aware of the risks and concerns. No fishing gear is apparent on or near the vessel. USCG will continue to include marine debris concerns in the response strategy and will continue to consult with the NOAA SSC about marine debris and other natural resource issues. [SEP] Photo from USCG Public Affairs [SEP] COAST GUARD, STATE REMOVING FUEL FROM GROUNDED VESSEL ON NIIHAU Office of Public Affairs U.S. Coast Guard Press Release Date: Dec. 31, 2006 Contact: Public Affairs (808) 341-9847; 541-2122 Coast Guard, State Removing Fuel From Grounded Vessel On Niihau HONOLULU -- The Coast Guard, in cooperation with the Hawaii State Department of Health and the Robinson family, continues to monitor the removal of fuel from a grounded fishing vessel at Kawaihoa Point, near the southern tip of Niihau. The fishing vessel ran aground at 7:15 p.m. Friday. Two men onboard were air lifted off Niihau by a Coast Guard HH-65 Dolphin helicopter. Neither survivor reported injuries. The 44-foot Wahine Kepaloa II remains aground on the beach in a rocky area. The vessel is breaking up and the Coast Guard Captain of the Port has federalized the case in order to remove oil and hazardous materials from the vessel. A federalized case gives the Coast Guard authority to hire a contractor to help remove fuel and oils which may pose a risk to the environment. A Coast Guard pollution investigator reported no signs of pollution and no visible impact to marine life or birds in the immediate area after a comprehensive assessment earlier today. The removal of the pollutants include an estimated 400 gallons of diesel fuel. Photos of the Wahihe Kepaloa II taken today are available at www.uscghawaii.com. [SEP] To: Ruth Yender NOAA SSC Monday, January 1, 2007 0800 Hawaii Time FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Weather forecast for small diesel spill off Ni'ihau Island. FORECAST: TODAY East winds 15 kt. Wind waves 4 ft. Northwest swell 6 ft. TONIGHT East winds 10 kt. Wind waves 3 ft. Northwest swell 7 ft increasing to 14 ft. TUESDAY East winds 10 kt. Wind waves 3 ft. Northwest swell 14 ft. Isolated showers. TUESDAY NIGHT Northeast winds to 25 kt. Wind waves 6 ft. Northwest swell 12 ft. Isolated showers. WEDNESDAY Northeast winds to 25 kt. Wind waves 8 ft. Northwest swell 11 ft. Scattered showers. WEDNESDAY NIGHT East winds to 25 kt. Wind waves 9 ft. Northwest swell 10 ft decreasing to 8 ft after midnight. Isolated showers. THURSDAY East winds to 25 kt. Wind waves 8 to 10 ft. Northwest swell 5 to 6 ft. Isolated showers. FRIDAY East winds 15 to 20 kt. Wind waves 6 to 8 ft. Northwest swell 3 ft. Isolated showers. [SEP] To: Ruth Yender NOAA SSC Tuesday, January 2, 2007 1130 Hawaii Time FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Weather forecast for small diesel spill off Ni'ihau Island. WARNINGS: High surf advisory today: Surf at the SW tip of the island expected to be 25-30 feet today, subsiding tonight. The ship location, 21d-48.52'N and 160d-11.59'W, is protected from the NW swell, but is effected by Easterly wind waves. Surf at the ship location is expected to be about 6 feet Tuesday, building to 8 feet Wednesday afternoon, and 10-12 feet Thursday through the weekend. FORECAST: TODAY East winds 15 kt., shifting to the NE later in the afternoon. Wind waves 5 ft. Northwest swell 13 ft. Surf 25-30 ft. at Southern tip, about 6 feet at the ship location. Isolated showers. TONIGHT Northeast winds 20 kt. Wind waves 7 ft. Northwest swell 14 ft. WEDNESDAY East winds 15-20 kt. Wind waves 10 ft. Northwest swell 10 ft. Surf 15-20 ft., dropping during the day at the Southern tip, building to 8' at the ship location. Isolated showers. WEDNESDAY NIGHT East winds to 25 kt. Wind waves 10 ft. Northwest swell 7 ft. Isolated showers. THURSDAY East winds to 25 kt. Wind waves 12 ft. Northwest swell 5 ft. Short period choppy seas, 10-11 foot surf. Isolated showers. THURSDAY NIGHT East winds to 25 kt. Wind waves 10 ft. Northwest swell 5 ft. Short period choppy seas, 10-11 foot surf. Isolated showers. FRIDAY East winds 20 kt. Wind waves 6 to 8 ft. Northwest swell 3 ft. Short period choppy seas, 10-11 foot surf. Isolated showers. SATURDAY Southeast winds 10 to 15 kt. Wind waves 3 to 4 ft. Northwest swell 3 to 5 ft. Short period choppy seas, 10-11 foot surf. Isolated showers. [SEP] To: Ruth Yender NOAA SSC Wednesday, January 3, 2007 0900 Hawaii Time FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Weather forecast for F/V Wahine Kepaloa II -- Ni'ihau Island. WARNINGS: Small craft advisory remains in effect through early Friday morning. TODAY Northeast winds to 20 kt. Wind waves 9 ft. Northwest swell 8 ft. Local surf 4-6 ft. Isolated showers. TONIGHT East winds to 20 kt. Wind waves 11 ft. Northwest swell 6 ft. Local surf 4-6 ft. Isolated showers. THURSDAY East winds to 20 kt. Wind waves 12 ft. Northwest swell 6 ft. Local surf 4-6 ft. Isolated showers. THURSDAY NIGHT East winds to 20 kt. Wind waves 11 ft. Northwest swell 4 ft. Local surf 4-6 ft. Isolated showers. FRIDAY East winds 20 kt. Wind waves 8 ft. Northwest swell 3 ft. Local surf 4-6 ft. Scattered
MSU Galveston notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a reported 500 bbl spill of a medium-heavy crude oil spill offshore of SE Texas. The volume and product was later upgraded to 1000 bbl of light crude (See hotline entry on 12/27). The location is roughly 20 miles offshore. The spill was the result of a pipeline failure discovered at 0640 hrs local time. The pipeline was immediately shut in. [SEP] According to the attached press release, the spill volume has been increased to 1000 barrels from the previous report of 500 barrels USCG Press Release Date: Dec. 26, 2006 Contact: Coast Guard Public Affairs (832) 250-6667 Pat Diamond, Plains Pipeline (337) 802-6971 UPDATE: RUPTURED PIPELINE LEAKS OIL INTO THE GULF OF MEXICO HOUSTON - The light crude oil pipeline that ruptured 30 miles south east of Galveston, Texas, Sunday has continued to leak oil into the Gulf of Mexico. An overflight sent out by Plains Pipeline today to view the spill site spotted a light sheen, which is approximately two miles long and 100 yards wide. The flight confirmed that the current and wind are pushing the oil away from shore, and it is not interrupting any ship traffic. The pipeline is leaking from the platform side of the rupture at approximately 500 gallons a day. As of 4 p.m., an estimate of 42,000 gallons of oil has been leaked. Plains Pipeline is bringing in a dive ship, the American Victory, which is scheduled to arrive Wednesday morning. Once on scene the divers will survey the damage and plug the pipeline. A Unified Command is overseeing the operation, and consists of the Plains Pipeline LP, the Coast Guard and Texas General Land Office. The Coast Guard Public Informations Officer can be reached at (832) 250-6667, and the Pl ains Pipeline Public Information Officer can be reached at (337) 802-6971. [SEP] From Charlie Henry: Initial Report, 24 Dec. 2006 Christmas Eve MSU Galveston notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a reported 500 bbl spill of a medium-heavy crude oil spill offshore of SE Texas. The location is roughly 20 miles offshore. The spill was the result of a pipeline failure discovered at 0640 hrs local time. The pipeline was immediately shut in. Bad weather hampered an overflight to assess the release. At 1145 hrs a 6 mile long slick was observed. The oil was reported as brownish, and the sea state as very rough: waves between 8 and 12 feet were being reported and winds in excess of 18 knots. The conditions were too rough for any offshore recovery operations. The location of the slick was reported as 28?? 49.9' N Lat. 094?? 34.2' W Long., but there was no additional information as to what part of the slick or even if that was the source of the leak. The USCG was attempting a second overflight from Airstation Corpus Christi. The TABS current meters and the NOAA Marine Weather forecast was investigated to formulate a very rough trajectory. At least until Tuesday, the currents are moving down coast and the winds are blowing with a northern component (offshore). These conditions should keep the oil spill offshore and moving toward the SW. Once better overflight information is available, NOAA will produce a better trajectory. In general, a 500 bbl spill exposed to the sea state conditions offshore, will soon breakup and weather such that only emulsified oil as tarballs and tar patties remain. These will be hard to see by air, and any sheens would be quickly lost in the breaking waves. Once there is a sustained period of onshore winds, the scattered tarballs and patties could wash ashore. The remnants of the spill may even make it all the way to the Matagorda or Padre Island, but that would take some time. The longer the remnants of the slick persist at sea, the more spread out and scatter the oil will become. When it does come ashore, it would probably be observed as sporadic oiling over a fairly wide area. Given that natural seep oil also comes ashore in these areas, it might be blended into the background levels of oil tar. With the limited information, it is too early to guess what might really happen. [SEP] Adios Run [SEP] Approprimate location of pipeline break [SEP] Press Release Date: Dec. 28, 2006 Contact: PA3 Mario Romero (832) 250-6667 Jordan Janak, Plains Pipeline (713) 449-3730 UPDATE: BAD WEATHER STALLS OIL CLEAN-UP, HOUSTON - Bad weather stalled the clean-up and pipeline response efforts 30 miles south east of Galveston, Texas, Wednesday night. Strong winds and large waves have made working conditions unsafe, forcing the dive ship American Victory and the skimmer Ampol Recovery to stop operations. The skimmer Brutis is remaining on scene to monitor the oil sheen. The divers sealed the shore side end of the breach by inflating rubber buoys inside the pipe at 11:20 p.m. Wednesday. Divers were unable to locate the platform end of the breach due to zero visibility caused by heavy silt conditions and deteriorating weather conditions. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the waves are currently five to six feet high, and are expected to reach eight feet by the end of the day. The winds are currently at 17 knots, with occasional gusts to 20, and are expected to pick up to 20 knots with gusts to 27 by tonight. The weather is expected to worsen over the next two days; with pipeline repair efforts expected to resume one Sunday. The ruptured pipeline has leaked an estimated 43,000 gallons of oil, and it continues to leak at approximately 500 gallons per day, or 21 gallons per hour. The cause of the rupture is still under investigation. A Unified Command, consisting of Plains Pipeline LP, Coast Guard and Texas General Land Office personnel, is overseeing the operation. The Coast Guard Public Information Officer can be reached at (832) 250-6667, and the Plains Pipeline Public Information Officer can be reached at (713) 449-3730. [SEP] Press Release Date: Dec. 26, 2006 Contact: PA3 Mario Romero (832) 250-6667 RUPTURED PIPELINE LEAKS OIL INTO THE GULF OF MEXICO HOUSTON - A medium crude oil pipeline ruptured 30 miles south east of Galveston, Texas, and leaked approximately 21,000 gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico Sunday, Dec 24. Plains Pipeline notified watchstanders at Coast Guard Sector Houston/Galveston early Sunday that oil might have been released from one of their pipes, and confirmed it late Monday, Dec. 25. The oil was released from the High Island Pipeline system, which had detected a pressure loss and shut down early on Sunday. The cause of the leak is still under investigation. Plains Pipeline, Coast Guard, and Texas General Land Office personnel have established a Unified Command Post to manage the clean-up and recovery of the oil. For further information contact Petty Officer Mario Romero at (832) 250-6667. [SEP] The USCG requests a general discussion of the fate and weathering of the light crude oil. [SEP] NOAA Wx SYNOPSIS FOR HIGH ISLAND TO THE MATAGORDA SHIP CHANNEL OUT 60 NAUTICAL MILES INCLUDING GALVESTON AND MATAGORDA BAYS 252 PM CST SUN DEC 24 2006 LOW PRESSURE OFF THE UPPER TEXAS AND LOUISIANA COASTS THIS AFTERNOON WILL MOVE ON SHORE IN LOUISIANA TONIGHT. A SECOND COLD FRONT WILL MOVE RAPIDLY THROUGH TEXAS TONIGHT AND OFF THE COAST EARLY MONDAY. HIGH PRESSURE WILL BUILD INTO THE NORTHWEST GULF TUESDAY THEN MOVE EAST WEDNESDAY AND THURSDAY. THE NEXT STORM SYSTEM WILL POSSIBLY BEGIN IMPACTING THE COASTAL WATERS FRIDAY. SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY IN EFFECT FROM MONDAY MORNING THROUGH LATE MONDAY NIGHT... SMALL CRAFT SHOULD EXERCISE CAUTION... TONIGHT...NORTHWEST WINDS 10 TO 15 KNOTS INCREASING TO 15 TO 20 KNOTS AFTER MIDNIGHT. BAY WATERS SLIGHTLY CHOPPY INCREASING TO CHOPPY AFTER MIDNIGHT. A CHANCE OF RAIN. MONDAY...NORTHWEST WINDS 15 TO 25 KNOTS. BAY WATERS CHOPPY TO ROUGH. A CHANCE OF RAIN UNTIL LATE AFTERNOON. MONDAY NIGHT...NORTHWEST WINDS 15 TO 25 KNOTS DECREASING TO NEAR 15 KNOTS AFTER MIDNIGHT. BAY WATERS CHOPPY DECREASING TO SLIGHTLY CHOPPY AFTER MIDNIGHT. TUESDAY...NORTHWEST WINDS 10 TO 15 KNOTS BECOMING VARIABLE 5 KNOTS OF LESS IN THE AFTERNOON. BAY WATERS SLIGHTLY CHOPPY DECREASING TO SMOOTH. TUESDAY NIGHT...SOUTH WINDS 5 TO 10 KNOTS. BAY WATERS SMOOTH. WEDNESDAY...SOUTH WINDS 10 TO 15 KNOTS. BAY WATERS SLIGHTLY CHOPPY. WEDNESDAY NIGHT...SOUTH WINDS 15 TO 20 KNOTS. BAY WATERS CHOPPY. [SEP] USCG Photo: The oil slick is reported to be approximately 1000 yards, or half a mile, long and 30 yards wide. It is a light, silvery sheen on top of the water. It is not moving towards shore, and it is not affecting ship traffic at this time. [SEP] The US Coast Guard has announced that that the ruptured Plains All American-operated High Island Pipeline crude pipeline has been completely secured. The pipeline, situated near Galveston, TX, was sealed by divers last weekend. Improving weather allowed the divers to return to the spill area, according to a Coast Guard news release. The pipeline rupture, first discovered
USCG contacted ERD regarding a barge collision near Baton Rouge, LA.  The incident resulted in the release of raffinate, a gasoline type substance.  The USCG requested assistance in determinining an appropriate safety zone for response to the incident [SEP] Initial Report, 6 Dec. 2006 AM The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a barge incident on the Mississippi River near the Port Allen Locks (the west side of the river near Baton Rouge, Louisiana) on the morning of 6 December 2006. Apparently a barge carrying raffinate was carried into a raft of other barges during a maneuver to enter the locks. Raffinate is a light petroleum distillate that is highly flammable and is sometimes labeled petroleum naptha. The tank barge was the MMI 612, a 297 foot barge with a max capacity reported at 31,825 barrels. The barge was damaged at the #3 Port Wing Tank and #2 Port Cargo Tank. The initial report stated that the MMI 612 hit the starboard bow corner wrapper on the rake of a barge in fleet at Cargo Carriers at mm 227.5. There was significant damage to the top of the #3 Port Wing tank as well as an estimated 2 1/2 foot inset into the #2 Port Cargo Tank. There are two cargo tank ruptures in the #2 Port Cargo Tank, both of which are above the deck and in way of the upset. The cargo tank extends an estimated 5' above the deck. The lower rupture is just above the deck and is a fractured weld. The cargo was offloaded to MMI 611 such that the remaining product was below the fractures and there is no additional leaking. The source was secured at approximately 0915 hrs local time. Both ruptures have been plugged using soap. The offloaded product was placed on the MMI 611. There was no water in any of the voids on the MMI 611, and the most significant damage to the wing tank is above the waterline. The barge that was struck was loaded with rock. The spilled product is petroleum naptha (Exxon product name is UDEX Raffinate). An estimated amount spilled is still unknown, but is probably significantly less than 100 barrels initially reported. Some suggest that the actual value may only be a barrel, or a few barrels. Given the small volume believed spilled, it would be difficult to make an accurate mass balance determination based on the volume of product remaining on the two barges. An OSRO responded on scene. The pollution team reported to the USCG that as soon as product hit the water it dissipated so there is likely little to anything to clean up. In truth, it didn't dissipate immediately. By the time OSRO arrived on scene, a small volume such as that reported spilled would have evaporated. A Safety Zone was established and is still in place. After we confirm that all clean up has been completed, and have a plan to move the damaged barge the Safety Zone will be cancelled. The proposed RP plan is to transit the barge to Pasenda, TX for offload. The USCG will not allow such a transit until a detailed damage survey of the cargo tank and integrity of the vessel is complete. At a minimum, the damaged cargo tank will be completed offloaded and a survey done of the remainder of the tanks to ensure there is no damage there for any transit. The NOAA SSC will follow-up with the USCG, but it would appear that there are few issues left to address. [SEP] Photograph of Barge MMI 612 (photograph provided by USCG). [SEP] RAFFINATE SPILL, PORT ALLEN LOCKS, BATON ROUGE, LA Wednesday December 6, 2006 Sunset (12/06): 1703 Sunrise (12/07): 0648 Sunset (12/07): 1704 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, the winds are forecast to be from the S at 5 or less. Late tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 5-10 knots. Thursday, the winds are predicted to be from the NE at 10-15 knots with gust to 20 knots. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Thursday, a slight chance of showers is in the region. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high is expected to be in the mid 60's and the low in the low to mid 40's. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Thursday, mostly clear skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, winds are predicted to be from the NE at 5-10knots. Clear skies. Saturday, winds are expected to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Clear skies. [SEP] There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident.
During a storm, the 80+ foot Tug Seneca grounded in 3 feet of water.  The tug is carrying 1900 gallons of diesel fuel and 50 gallons of lubricating oil.  No oil has been released at this time.  Marine Safety Field Office Sault Ste Marie contacted NOAA ERD for assistance in determining the feasibility of monitoring the vessel via satellite imagery.DOI/Bur. of Indian Affairs has been contacted by the USCG and Mike Ripley a fisheries biologist for the Chippewa & Ottawa Resources Authority (a tribal organization) has responded regarding concerns over tribal fish resources. [SEP] Salvage Ops [SEP] USCG Release [SEP] Seneca [SEP] Courtesy of US Coast Guard [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR TUG SENECA, LAKE SUPERIOR, MI 1730 CST, Tuesday December 12, 2006 Sunset (12/12): 1700 CST Sunrise (12/13): 0753 Sunset (12/13): 1700 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tuesday evening: SE winds at 10-15 knots. Tuesday night: S winds at 5-10 knots. Wednesday morning: W winds at 10-15 knots. Wednesday afternoon: SW winds at 15-20 knots. Wednesday night: SW winds at 10-20 knots. Thursday morning: S winds at 15-20 knots. Thursday afternoon: SW winds at 15-20 knots. Thursday night: SW winds at 10-20 knots. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Wednesday, chance of drizzle and areas of fog. Thursday, chance of rain and/or snow showers. _____________________________________ Temperature: Tonight through Thursday, the air temp is forecast to be near 40 for the high with lows in the lower 30's. Water temp: Estimated to be near 40F. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are predicted to be from the W at 15-20 knots in the morning hours shifting to be from the NW at 15-20 knots in the afternoon. Friday night, the winds are forecast to be from the NW at 10-15 knots dropping to S at 5-10 knots overnight. Chance of snow showers. Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the S at 10-20 knots becoming W at 10-20 knots late in the day. Rain or snow showers are forecast in the region. Sunday, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 20-25 knots becoming NW at 15-20 knots late in the day. Chance of snow showers. Ice Conditions on the Lake: This section of the lake is not expected to freeze over in the near future. Due to the predominant NW winds during the winter, the SE corner of Lake Superior has a lot of vertical mixing which would inhibit a layer of surface ice from forming. In a typical year, shore fast ice may form in late February or early March when the Lake temperature is much colder. An atypical cold period could result is ice formation earlier in the winter but at this time, this is not expected to happen. [SEP] Courtesy of US Coast Guard [SEP] NOAA/ORR/ERD, Modeling & Simulations (Seattle, WA) NOAA Hazmat used ranges of wind speeds and directions, and sea state for the grounding area to produce a guide that can be used to predict oil movement and oil fate should a spill occur under these variable conditions. Given the maximum potential release of 2,000 gallons of diesel, there are no conditions predicted that would result in a sheen larger than 1 - 2 miles. Any shoreline impacts that do occur would be staining from the diesel similar to a "bathtub ring" effect. Long term persistant oil contamination to the shoreline is not predicted. These predictions are for contingency planning purposes, should operations begin that increase the likelyhood of an actual spill, or if an actual spill occurs, the NOAA SSC should be contacted to assess the situation in more detail using the actual on-scene conditions at the time. Trajectory Possibilities from Tug Seneca with no ice cover on the lake. For onshore winds  Wind speed of 20 - 30 knots Spotty shoreline staining within 1/2 mile of the vessel. Expect more impacts to the east of the vessel. Persistence of a visible sheen in the water, less than 6 hours  Wind speed of 10 - 20 knots Shoreline staining within 1- 1.5 miles of the vessel. Expect more impacts to the east of the vessel. Persistence of a visible sheen in the water, less than 24 hours For offshore winds ... no shoreline impacts expected  Wind speed of 20 - 30 knots A visible sheen extending for 1/4 - 1 mile persisting for less than 12 hours  Wind speed of 10 - 20 knots A visible sheen extending for 1 - 2 miles persisting for less than 24 hours What would happen if 2000 gallons of diesel spilled with significant ice cover? If the vessel was surrounded in ice and spilled 2000 gallons of diesel fuel, we would expect a noticeable staining on the ice with some oil being incorporated into the ice. We do not expect any oil on the ice or in the ice to move until the ice melted. Any oil spilled into the water under the ice, could move move with currents under the ice. However, there is no reason to expect strong currents under the ice in this nearshore environment. Therefore, we would not expect significant movement of the oil. A reasonable estimate of how far the oil could move would be 1 - 2 miles per day or less. If this should occur, we would expect the concentration of the oil to diminish over time as the oil spread under the ice. Note that this area of the Lake is not expected to freeze until late February if at all. ADIOS II Oil Fate estimates for Diesel Fuel Oil with no ice cover. Notes these are only functions of the wind speeds and not direction. Wind speed 20 - 30 knots Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent  1 2,000 - 17 - 47 - 36  2 2,000 21 79 0  Wind Speed = constant at 15 - 20 knots Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent  1 2,000 - 17 - 12 - 72  2 2,000 28 32 40  3 2,000 - 32 - 49 - 19  4 2,000 33 58 9 Wind Speed = constant at 10-15 knots Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent  1 2,000 - 13 - 2 - 85  2 2,000 24 7 68  3 2,000 - 32 - 15 - 54  4 2,000 36 22 43  5 2,000 - 38 - 28 - 34  6 2,000 40 32 28  7 2,000 - 41 - 36 - 23  8 2,000 42 39 19  9 2,000 - 42 - 42 - 16  10 2,000 43 44 13  11 2,000 - 43 - 46 - 11  12 2,000 43 47 9 [SEP] Courtesy of US Coast Guard [SEP] Courtesy of US Coast Guard [SEP] Courtesy of US Coast Guard [SEP] SPOT WEATHER FORECAST FOR TUG SENECA 1230 EST, Wednesday December 6, 2006 Sunset (12/06): 1619 CST Sunrise (12/07): 0717 Sunset (12/07): 1619 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Wedesday afternoon: NW winds at 30 knots Wednesday night: N winds at 30 knots Thursday morning: N winds at 25 - 30 knots Thursday afternoon: N to NW winds at 20 - 25 knots Thursday night: NW winds at 20 knots Friday: WNW to W winds at 20 knots _____________________________________ Seas: Wedesday afternoon: 10 - 15 feet Wednesday night: 10 - 15 feet Thursday morning: 10 - 15 feet Thursday afternoon: 10 - 15 feet Thursday night: 10 feet or less _____________________________________ Precipitation: Expect bands of snow tonight with possible thunder and lightening.  _____________________________________ Temperature: Air temp: Hi today in the upper 20s with Lows about 10 F Water temp: Estimated to be near 40F. _____________________________________ Ice Conditions on the Lake: This section of the lake is not expected to freeze over in the near future. Due to the predominant NW winds during the winter, the SE corner of Lake Superior has a lot of vertical mixing which would inhibit a layer of surface ice from forming. In a typical year, shore fast ice may form in late February or early March when the Lake temperature is much colder. An atypical cold period could result is ice formation earlier in the winter but at this time, this is not expected to happen. [SEP] Courtesy: US Coast Guard
On November 18, 2006, NOAA ERD was notified of a mystery spill in the area of Main Pass, Breton Sound, LA. The nearest facility, a platform operated by Bois Biaz, has initiated response actions but it is not clear whether they are the RP. Several pipelines also cross the area. The release point is boomed and the release rate is estimated at 1-2 barrels per hour. [SEP] MAIN PASS 21, BRETON SOUND, LA 1200 CST, Monday November 21, 2006 Sunset (11/21): 1702 Sunrise (11/22): 0631 Sunset (11/22): 1702 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This afternoon through Wednesday, the winds are forecast to be from the N at 20-25 knots. _____________________________________ Seas: Today through Wednesday, seas are predicted to be 4-5 feet nearshore. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, no precipitation is expected in the region. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high is expected to be in the near 60 and the low near 40. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Wednesday, mostly clear skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, winds are forecast to be from the N 10-15 knots. Seas, 1-3 feet. No precipitation is expected in the region. Mostly clear skies are forecast. Friday, winds are forecast to be from the N 5-10 knots. Seas, 1-2 feet. No precipitation is expected in the region. Mostly clear skies are forecast. Saturday, winds are forecast to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Seas, 1-2. No precipitation is expected in the region. Mostly clear skies are forecast. [SEP] The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a mystery slick reported in Breton Sound shortly after noon on Saturday, 18 November 2006. Little information was initially known. An industry overflight conducted that afternoon reported a slick originating at 29?? 33.91' N Lat. 089?? 20.25' W Long. and extending more than two miles over open water. The winds were from the N at 10 to 20 mph and the slick was breaking up past that point. The USCG was initiating an investigation, but the weather was inhibiting an on-scene response. Breton Island, a Federal Wildlife Refuge, was located some 15 miles to the SE of this location. Because of the N wind and high sea state, the oil was moving S, not persisting, and not threatening the refuge. NOAA has been working with the USCG on this incident since the initial report, and the USFWS was notified. [SEP] The photograph shows the location where the oil pollution is surfacing. Oil is shown surfacing and collecting in boom. The actual source is still unknown, and still under investigation (photograph provided by USCG). [SEP] MAIN PASS 21, BRETON SOUND, LA 1400 CST, Monday November 20, 2006 Sunset (11/20): 1702 Sunrise (11/21): 0630 Sunset (11/21): 1702 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This afternoon, the winds are forecast to be from the N-NW at 15-20 knots. Tonight through Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the N at 20-25 knots. _____________________________________ Seas: Today through Tuesday, seas are predicted to be 3-4 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tuesday, no precipitation is expected in the region. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high is expected to be in the upper 50's and the low near 40. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tuesday, mostly clear skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, winds are forecast to be from the N 15-20 knots decreasing to 10-15 knots late in the day. Seas, 3-4 feet. No precipitation is expected in the region. Mostly clear skies are forecast. Thursday, winds are forecast to be from the N-NW 10-15 knots. Seas, 2-3 feet. No precipitation is expected in the region. Mostly clear skies are forecast. Friday, winds are forecast to be from the N-NW 10-15 knots becoming variable at 5-10 knots late in the day. Seas, 2-3 feet decreasing to be 1-2. No precipitation is expected in the region. Mostly clear skies are forecast. [SEP] Update, 21 Nov. 2006 AM An overfight was conducted at 0900 of the Boisd'Arc facility at Main Pass 21 on 20 November. Oil appeared to be leaking at about the same rate as previously reported (1 bbl, maybe more, per hour). At the time of the overflight, there was a strong N wind at 15 to 20 knots. The oil collecting in the boom in the boom was entraining and splashing over. The overflight tracked the sheen from the source, and estimated the size as about 100 yards wide and 2 miles long with ribbons of crude oil 5 to10 feet wide by a half a mile long coming off the boom. After that, the released oil was breaking up into sheen. The direction the sheen was moving was on a heading of 190 degrees, and the nearest land in that direction was about 9 miles to the south (29?? 23.40' N Lat., 089?? 22.56' W Long.). Suspected sources are still being investigated. Boisd'Arc stated they had a 3 inch sales line that ran into a 20 inch Chevron pipeline, and that this 3 inch line is under a sunken barge. Boisd'Arc stated that that line was capped and is 20 feet away from the barge. Boisd'Arc are not sure if the 3 inch line was shut in by chevron were it connects to the 20 inch pipe. There are also some old flow lines that the barge may be resting on, but they surveyed those lines about 6 months ago and they are not currently connected into anything. Boisd'Arc also stated that it is possible they might have missed some lines in the survey. Another possibility being investigated is a Harvest Oil 4 inch sales line coming out of Breton Sound 32 that is tied into Boisd'Arc's 3 inch line, which could be causing the leak (still under investigation). Harvest oil has been running that line for about two weeks and they have not noticed any pressure changes, and are unsure (they do not think) the Harvest Oil 4" inch line ties into the Boisd'Arc 3 inch line. Again, the source is still under investigation and will require a dive survey to confirm. The work barge and dive team was unable to make a survey on 20 November due to weather, but should be out today to attempt a survey. The Clean Gulf vessel Grand Bay is on stand by in Venice, and will be on scene when the weather starts to break. The Grand Bay is a 40 foot skimming vessel, and should be able to handle the amount of oil that is being released. [SEP] It was determined that the source of the oil spill was a three-inch connection line that was thought to have been isolated from the system. Once Harvest oil shut in a connecting flowline on 22 November, the discharged ceased. Bois d'Arc Resources has plugged the line and is in the process of removing it completely. No additional spill response support has been requested. In summary, the mystery slick was finally traced to a known source and secured. An unknown quantity of oil was released from a connection pipeline that has since been secured. Previous reports outline the observed sheens. During the duration of the event, strong winds contributed to a high rate of natural dispersion. No oil was reported to have been recovered due in part to heavy seas and sea-state that didn't allow for on-water recovery operations. [SEP] MAIN PASS 21, BRETON SOUND, LA 0930 CST, Tuesday November 28, 2006 Sunset (11/28): 1700 Sunrise (11/28): 0637 Sunset (11/28): 1700 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Today through Wednesday, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. _____________________________________ Seas: Today through Wednesday, seas are predicted to be 2-4 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, slight chance of scattered showers in the region. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high is expected to be in the mid 70's and the low in the mid 60's. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Wednesday, partly cloudy to cloudy skies are forecast. Areas of dense fog are expected after midnight. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, winds are forecast to be from the S at 10-15 knots shifting in the afternoon to be from the SW at 15-20 knots. Overnight, the winds are predicted to be from the NW at 15-20 knots. Seas, 4-6 feet. Chance of showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Partly cloudy skies are forecast. Friday, winds are forecast to be from the N at 20-25 knots. Seas, 5-7 feet. Isolated of showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Cloudy skies are forecast Saturday, winds are forecast to be from the N at 15-20 knots. Seas, 4-6 feet. Chance of showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Partly cloudy skies are forecast. [SEP] Another photograph of oil slick on 20 Nov. (provided by USCG). [SEP] Map provided by USCG showing the location of the source and leading edge of slick on 19 Nov. [SEP] MAIN PASS 21, BRETON SOUND, LA 1215 CST, Monday November 27, 2006 Sunset (11/27): 1701 Sunrise (11/28): 0636 Sunset (11/28): 1700 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: A small craft advisory is in effect until 6pm. Today,
Just before midnight on November 9, 2006, the T/V Kristin Poling grounded between Buoys 5 and 7 outside East Rockaway Inlet, Atlantic Beach, NY. The vessel is reported to be carrying 672,000 gallons of No. 2 Home Heating Oil and Diesel onboard. Vessel reports no damage, injuries or pollution. Morning USCG overflight reports no sheen or oil in water. Vessel is grounded by the bow. Position 40-35.25'N, 073-46'W. [SEP] Spot Weather Forecast for T/V Kristin Poling Grounding 1230 EST, Saturday November 11, 2006 Sunset (11/10): 1642 EST Sunrise (11/11): 0639 EST Sunset (11/11): 1640 EST _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Saturday (11/11) Afternoon: Winds from S at 10 - 15 knots with gusts to 25 knots Night : Winds from SE at 10 -15 knots with gusts to 25 knots Sunday (11/12) Morning : Winds from the E 10 - 15 knots Afternoon: Winds from the E at 15 -20 knots with gusts to 30 knots Night : Winds from the E at 10 - 15 knots _____________________________________ Seas: Saturday (11/11) Afternoon: 3 - 5 feet Night : 3 - 5 feet Sunday (11/12) Morning : 4 - 6 feet Afternoon: 4 - 6 feet Night : 5 - 8 feet _____________________________________ Precipitation: Rain likely after midnight Saturday going into Sunday. Sunday rain, heavy at times. _____________________________________ Temperatures: High Saturday upper 60s. Low Saturday night mid 50s. High Sunday mid 50s Low Sunday low 50s. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Areas of patchy fog tonight and into tomorrow morning. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday : Winds from the NE at 10 - 15 knots becoming 5 - 10 knots in the afternoon. Seas 5 to 8 feet Tuesday: Winds from the NW 10 - 15 knots with seas 4 - 6 feet Wednesday: Winds from the S at 10 - 15 knots with 2 - 4 ft seas [SEP] T/V Kristin Poling near entrance to Rockaway Inlet, NY [SEP] Tidal Heights at East Rockaway Inlet, Long Island, south shore, NEW YORK Station No. 1255 Latitude: 40deg 35.70' N Longitude: 73deg 44.60' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:07 Low Water -00:14 High water height difference: (*0.88+0.0) Low water height difference: (*0.90+0.0) Based on SANDY HOOK (calculated from constituent data) From Fri Nov 10, 2006 to Thu Nov 16, 2006 (7 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Fri Nov 10, 2006; 11:05 am; 4.4ft Lowest Tide - Thu Nov 16, 2006; 10:37 pm; 0.4ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 11/10/2006 04:32 +0.5 Low Fri 11:05 +4.4 High 17:33 +0.4 Low 23:50 +3.6 High ------------------------------------------------------- 11/11/2006 05:26 +0.8 Low Sat 12:01 +4.2 High 18:33 +0.6 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 11/12/2006 00:46 +3.6 High Sun 06:29 +1.1 Low 12:55 +3.9 High 19:35 +0.7 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 11/13/2006 01:40 +3.6 High Mon 07:39 +1.1 Low 13:48 +3.8 High 20:31 +0.7 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 11/14/2006 02:33 +3.6 High Tue 08:41 +1.0 Low 14:40 +3.7 High 21:18 +0.6 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 11/15/2006 03:25 +3.8 High Wed 09:35 +0.9 Low 15:32 +3.7 High 21:58 +0.5 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 11/16/2006 04:14 +4.0 High Thu 10:22 +0.7 Low 16:23 +3.7 High 22:37 +0.4 Low -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- File: EastRockaway_H_Nov10-Nov16.jpg [SEP] Situation Update 11 Nov 2006 [SEP] Location Map [SEP] Tidal Currents at East Rockaway Inlet, LONG ISLAND, South Coast Station No. 3626 Latitude: 40deg 35.40' N Longitude: 73deg 45.30' W Maximum Flood Direction: 42deg Maximum Ebb Direction : 227deg Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood -01:36 Flood -01:36 Minimum Before Ebb -01:11 Ebb -01:45 Flood Speed Ratio: 1.40 Ebb Speed Ratio: 1.20 Based on THE NARROWS (calculated from constituent data) From Fri Nov 10, 2006 to Thu Nov 16, 2006 (7 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 11/10/2006 02:23 -2.0 Max Ebb Fri 05:51 +0.0 Min Before Flood 08:58 +2.1 Max Flood 12:21 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 15:15 -2.2 Max Ebb 19:09 +0.0 Min Before Flood 22:10 +1.9 Max Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 11/11/2006 01:02 +0.0 Min Before Ebb Sat 03:33 -1.8 Max Ebb 07:04 +0.0 Min Before Flood 10:15 +2.0 Max Flood 13:22 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 16:32 -2.0 Max Ebb 20:14 +0.0 Min Before Flood 23:12 +1.9 Max Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 11/12/2006 02:07 +0.0 Min Before Ebb Sun 04:53 -1.7 Max Ebb 08:15 +0.0 Min Before Flood 11:21 +1.9 Max Flood 14:26 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 17:45 -2.0 Max Ebb 21:14 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 11/13/2006 00:09 +1.9 Max Flood Mon 03:13 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 06:05 -1.8 Max Ebb 09:21 +0.0 Min Before Flood 12:21 +1.8 Max Flood 15:31 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 18:46 -2.0 Max Ebb 22:07 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 11/14/2006 01:05 +1.9 Max Flood Tue 04:15 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 07:05 -1.9 Max Ebb 10:18 +0.0 Min Before Flood 13:21 +1.8 Max Flood 16:31 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 19:36 -2.0 Max Ebb 22:54 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 11/15/2006 02:00 +1.9 Max Flood Wed 05:09 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 07:56 -2.0 Max Ebb 11:10 +0.0 Min Before Flood 14:19 +1.8 Max Flood 17:22 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 20:17 -2.0 Max Ebb 23:35 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 11/16/2006 02:48 +1.9 Max Flood Thu 05:53 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 08:38 -2.0 Max Ebb 11:57 +0.0 Min Before Flood 15:06 +1.8 Max Flood 18:03 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 20:51 -2.0 Max Ebb [SEP] Date: October 10, 2006 2100 EST To: NOAA SSC Steve Lehmann / USCG Robert McKenna FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Trajectory for grounded T/V Kirsten Poling FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ This analysis is based on the following information: The T/V Kirstin Poling has grounded outside of the entrance to East Rockaway, NY., along the South shore of Long Island. The location is reported to be 49deg 35.25'N by 073deg 46.0' W. The vessel has 672,000 gallons of No.2 diesel onboard. There is no damage to the vessel, no injuries to the crew, and no pollution at this time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Light and variable winds tonight becoming S at 10 - 15 knots tomorrow. Seas will be 2 - 4 feet in the morning and increasing to 3 - 5 feet in the afternoon. On Sunday winds are expected to be 15 - 20 knots from the SE becoming 20 - 25 knots from the E in the afternoon with seas increasing to 4 - 7 feet. 2)Trajectory Should a spill occur under the predicted S winds on Saturday: And flood tide: Currents could carry oil into Reynolds Channel and north to Broad Channel 4 - 5 miles into East Rockaway Inlet in one flood cycle. Shoreline impacts will be along the north side of Reynolds Channel. And ebb tide: Current could carry oil along the beach from East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Pt in one ebb cycle. Should a spill occur under the predicted SE winds on Sunday morning: And flood tide: Currents could carry oil into Reynolds Channel and north to Broad Channel 3 - 4 miles into East Rockaway Inlet in one flood cycle. Shoreline impacts will be along the north side of Reynolds Channel. And ebb tide: Current will carry oil along the beach from East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Pt in one ebb cycle. On the subsequent flood cycle oil could enter Rockaway Inlet and impact the south shoreline of Coney Island. Oil should also be expected to enter NY Harbor through the Narrows. Should a spill occur under the predicted E winds on Sunday afternoon: And flood tide: Currents could carry oil 1 - 2 miles into East Rockaway Inlet And ebb tide: Currents will carry oil along the beach from East Rockaway Inlet to Rockaway Pt in one ebb cycle. On the subsequent flood cycle oil should be expected to enter NY Harbor through the Narrows. The East coast of Staten Island could also be impacted. [SEP] Spot Weather Forecast for T/V Kristin Poling Grounding 1415 EST, Sunday November 12, 2006 Sunset (11/12): 1642 EST Sunrise (11/13): 0641 EST Sunset (11/13): 1641 EST Small craft advisory remains in effect through Tuesday afternoon. _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Sunday (11/12) Afternoon: Winds from the NE at 10 -15 knots with gusts to 20 knots Night : Winds from the NE at 15 - 20 knots with gusts to 25 knots Monday (11/13) Morning: Winds from the NE at 15 - 20 knots with gusts to 25 knots Afternoon: Winds from NE at 10 - 20 knots with gusts to 25 knots Night : Winds from NE at 10 -15 knots with gusts to 20 knots _____________________________________ Seas: Sunday (11/12) Afternoon: 3 - 4 feet Night : 4 - 6 feet after midnight Monday (11/13) Morning: 5 - 7 feet by daybreak Afternoon: 6 - 9 feet Night : 5 - 7 feet _____________________________________ Precipitation: Sunday periods of rain with patchy drizzle. Monday a chance of rain in the morning with rain likely in the afternoon _____________________________________ Temperatures: High Sunday
The barge Hilton is aground and sunk in shallow water near Porto Castilla, Honduras.  The abandonment and grounding occurred in November 1990.  The barge originally was carrying 7000 BBLS of asphalt.  After offloading three tanks and leakage, the remaining volume onboard is unknown.  The Honduran government has asked for NOAA's suggestions on cleanup options. [SEP] Powerpoint presentation on status of barge [SEP] From Valerio Gutierrez Vice-Minister SERNA, Honduras [SEP] From Valerio Gutierrez Vice-Minister SERNA, Honduras [SEP] From Vice-Minister Gutierrez, SERNA, Honduras [SEP] Status Summary translated to English [SEP] From Vice-Minister Gutierrez, SERNA, Honduras [SEP] From Valerio Gutierrez Vice-Minister SERNA, Honduras [SEP] From Vice-Minister Gutierrez, SERNA, Honduras [SEP] From Vice-Minister Gutierrez, SERNA, Honduras [SEP] From Vice-Minister Gutierrez, SERNA, Honduras [SEP] From Valerio Gutierrez Vice-Minister SERNA, Honduras
A federalized clean-up of an estimated 100-200 gallons of crude oil pooled near the Empire Locks has been initiated. No RP has been identified. [SEP] During the hindcast support, several photographs of the degree of oiling in the riprap structures near the Empire Foodgates was provided by the USCG. This one is typical of the oil observed (photo credit USCG). [SEP] Final Report The last action that NOAA was asked to provide the USCG on this incident was a post-incident assessment of where the oil may have come from. The assessment is attached as a separate report. No other support has been request, but there were several lesson learned that would require follow-up through the Area Contingency Planning (ACP) process. One item identified was how to assess potential third party oyster lease claims when there is no Responsible Party and the damage claims will be filed against OPA90 Liability Funds. In summary, the mystery spill in Adams bay was responded to by the USCG as a Federal Project. The incident was first reported on 18 October 2006. The spill volume was initially thought to be 100 to 200 gallons. Once the recovery operations began, more than 900 gallons was collected near the Empire Floodgate, and the oil volume estimated was increased to 3000 gallons (estimate only). No RP has been identified. A map has been provided the highlights the areas impacted by the spill. From a response prospective, this incident is considered closed and this report constitutes a final hotline entry. [SEP] The map shows where oiling was observed by the USCG as of 19 Oct. 2006. This map was prepared by the NOAA SSC from briefings with the USCG Sector New Orleans who responded on-scene. The NOAA SSC was not on-scene during this incident. [SEP] Tidal currents for near the location of the spill. [SEP] Overflight photograph provided by USCG showing pooled oil near the Empire Lock. Date of photograph was probably 21 Oct. 2006. [SEP] Based on a request from the USCG, NOAA has assessed the trajectory implications of oil found in the vicinity of Empire Locks, Louisiana using a hindcast forecasting process. Unlike a conventional trajectory forecast that projects where observed oil will go, this process looks back to assess where the oil may have come from. _____________________________________________________________ These hindcast trajectory comments are based on the following reported observations provided to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) by the USCG: On the morning and early afternoon of October 18, 2006, there were a number of reports of floating oil and sheens in the vicinity of Bayou Fontalle, near 29?? 19' N, 089?? 37' W. On the afternoon of October 18, (exact time unknown), Hilcorp employee reported to the USCG that they observed a light sheen pass their facility at 29?? 18.31' N Lat. 089?? 36.93' W Long. This was the farthest south reported location. On October 18th 2006, approximately 1500 hrs., USCG overflight observed oil near Burlington Facility 29?? 19.31' N 089?? 37.22' W. An NRC report was filed (NRC Report 815303) by a Chevron employee of an unknown sheen of unknown size at 29?? 21.83' N Lat. 089?? 36.60' W Long. near a 20" pipeline based on a 1735 hrs. observation. 19 October 2006, AM, USCG on-scene observes heaviest impact of oil just outside of the Empire Floodgate (see attached map). USCG Overflight the same morning showed oil inside the riprap structures near the Empire Flood Gates (see attached photograph). If any of this initial information is incorrect, please contact the NOAA SSC know ASAP, as it may affect any hindcast implications. _____________________________________________________________ HINDCAST TRAJECTORY: The observations seem to indicate that the source of the oil is most likely to have been near the region of the original observations near Bayou Fontalle (approx: 29??- 20'N, 089??-37'W). There are many reasons for this, the characteristics of the slick, the lack of observed land impacts further to the south, and the oceanographic features and observations describe below. This region of where the slick was observed is in generally shallow water near the Mississippi River Delta. In this region, we expect any floating oil to be primarily moved by the winds with, in light wind conditions, some movement by tidal currents. The measured wind records from the Grand Isle C-MAN station for that time period indicate winds were generally from the south on the 18th and early 19th of October. On the 18th, the winds were fairly light, consistent with floating oil staying in approximately the same region, with some movement from the tides. There was an ebb tide in the late morning and afternoon on the 18th. This ebb tide, combined with the light winds could have moved the oil to the south, to the southern most observation by Hilcorp at: 29??18.31'N - 089??36.93'W. Around 2130 on the night of the 18th, the winds became stronger and more from the west. This would have moved any floating oil to the north and east, consistent with the oil found beached near the Empire Flood Gates. It is unlikely that the source of the oil was anywhere north of the Empire Flood Gates. The source was most likely in the region of initial observations. Disclaimer: While company names were used in the discussion above as providing information and geographical reference points, at present no known RP has been defined. [SEP] Overflight photograph provided by Shell (not the known RP). No date was provided, but this was probably from 18 Oct. 2006. The source of the slick is unknown. [SEP] The estimated volume has been increased to 3000 gallons. There is still no known RP. [SEP] UPDATE PROVIDED BY USCG SECTOR NEW ORLEANS, 24 OOCT. OIL SPILL CLEAN UP OPERATIONS CONTINUE IN ADAMS BAY AREA. USES FINISHED RECOVERY OF OIL NEAR EMPIRE FLOOD GATE AND CONTINUED COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF THE OIL AT THE ROCK JETTY ON THE WEST SIDE OF THE EMPIRE FLOOD GATE USING WASH PUMPS, A SKIMMER, AND SEVERAL BAGS OF SNARE. THE ESTIMATE OF TOTAL DISCHARGED OIL INTO ADAMS BAY INCREASED TO 3,000 GALLONS DUE TO DISCOVERY OF ADDITIONAL OIL INSIDE THE ROCK JETTIES AND ALONG THE SHORELINE, SEVERAL MILES FROM THE INITIAL SHEEN REPORT ON 18 OCT 06. POLLUTION INVESTIGATOR (PI) TEAM VERIFIED THE RESULTS OF THE OVERFLIGHT AND WALKED SEVERAL MILES OF THE SHORELINE; PI TEAM ESTIMATES THAT APPROXIMATELY 20 MILES OF SHORELINE (MARSH GRASS AND ROCK JETTIES) WERE AFFECTED BY THIS DISCHARGE OF OIL. CLEAN UP OPERATIONS CONTINUE AT SITE. APPROXIMATELY 500 GALLONS OF RECOVERABLE OIL REMAIN INSIDE THE ROCK JETTY WEST OF THE EMPIRE FLOOD GATE. ON OYSTERMAN REPORTED HAVING TO RELEASE CATCH DUE TO SPOILAGE ISSUES. ON 20 OCT 06, RECEIVED A REPORT FROM A LOCAL OYSTERMAN THAT HE BELIEVED HIS OYSTER BED WAS AFFECTED BY THIS OIL SPILL. [SEP] TIME: November 22, 2006 1400CST TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Hindcast of mystery spill near Empire Locks FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of oil found in the vicinity of Empire Locks, Louisiana These notes are based on the following reported observations: On the morning and early afternoon of October 18, 2006, there were a number of reports of floating oil and sheens in the vicinity of Bayou Fontalle, near 29??19'N - 089??37'W. On the afternoon of October 18, (exact time unknown), Hilcorp employee reported to the USCG that they observed a light sheen pass their facility at 29??18.31'N - 089??36.93'W. This was the farthest south reported location. On October 18th 2006, approximately 1500 hrs., USCG overflight observed oil near Burlington Facility 29??19.31'N - 089??37.22'W. An NRC report was filed (NRC Report 815303) by a Chevron employee of an unknown sheen of unknown size at 29??21.83'N - 089??36.60'W. near a 20" pipeline based on a 1735 hrs. observation. 19 October 2006, AM, USCG on-scene observes heaviest impact of oil just outside of the Empire Floodgate (see attached map). USCG Overflight the same morning showed oil inside the riprap structures near the Empire Flood Gates (see attached photograph). If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ TRAJECTORY: The observations seem to indicate that the source of the oil is most likely to have been near the region of the original observations near Bayou Fontalle (approx: 29??20'N - 089??37'W) The region of the oil is in generally shallow water in the Mississippi River Delta. In this region, we expect any floating oil to be primarily moved by the winds with, in light wind conditions, some movement by tidal currents. The measured wind records from the Grand Isle C-MAN station for that time period indicate winds were generally from the south on the 18th and early 19th of October. On the 18th, the winds were fairly light, consistent with floating oil staying in approximately the same region,
USCG reported that the Tug LA MARIE struck a submerged object approximately 17 miles off the Calcasieu Ship Channel at approximately 0015 hours local time on Sunday morning, 22 Oct. 2006. The last vessel position was sunk at 29deg 26.95' N Lat. 093deg 25.67' W Long. The vessel is reported in 42 foot of water and capsized. The vessel was reported to have nearly 100,000 gallons of diesel and 35,000 gallons of lube on board at the time of the incident. [SEP] There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. NOAA's support role was limited to remote trajectory support. [SEP] Brief Update: USCG MSO Port Arthur reports that a small sheen was observed at the site of the sunken vessel. A salvage master has been identified and dive operations to asses the vessel will start when the sea state slackens. The vessel will be lightered as part of the salvage plan. [SEP] The USCG report stated that dive operations to assess the damage were to begin on 24 Oct. 2006. The vessel is sunk and capsized in 42 foot of water. The initial salvage plan is to the lighter the vessel before lifting. The NOAA SSC was notified Sat. night of this incident (actually Sunday morning around 1:00 AM). The vessel report hitting a submerged object at 12:15 AM at the following approx. position: 29deg 24.775' N Lat. 093deg 23.978' W Long. The object was reported to be 12 feet below the surface. The vessel had a draft of 17 feet. The last vessel position was sunk at 29deg 26.95' N Lat. 093deg 25.67' W Long. A notice to mariners was report to have been generated by the USCG. The reports from the field on Sunday PM suggest that there was no continuing spill. The vessel was reported to have nearly 100,000 gallons of diesel and 3,500 gallons of lube at the time of the incident. [SEP] TIME: October 26, 2006, 1430CDT TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a potential catastrophic release from the sunken tug LA Marie. These notes are based on the following information: The Tug LA Marie struck a submerged object at 12:15 AM, Sunday, Oct 22. It is currently at position 29deg 26.95' N lat. - 093deg 25.67' W lon. That position is about 19 miles offshore, south of Calcasieu Pass, in about 42 feet of water. The vessel is estimated to contain 119,000 gal. Diesel Fuel, and about 840 gal. of lube oils. We have been asked to provide an assessment of the potential fate and trajectory of the oils that could be released during salvage operations in the next few weeks. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WINDS: At the end of October and the first few weeks of November, the prevailing winds vary in strength from about 4 to 16 knots, with an average of about 10 knots. The wind direction is from the southern quadrant (blowing toward shore) about 40% of the time, and from the northern quadrant (blowing away from shore) about 40% of the time. 2) TRAJECTORY: Data from TABS Buoy B (offshore of Galveston) indicate that the currents in the region at this time of year tend to move mostly down coast (toward Texas) at velocities up to 1 knot, but primarily less than 0.5 knots. Given the winds and the currents in the region, any released oil is most likely to move down coast toward Texas, and toward shore about 40% of the time, and away from shore 40% of the time. Thus, about 60% of the time, the oil will not approach land for a substantial period of time. Diesel fuel is volatile, and will not persist for long. However, if the winds and waves are low at the time of the release, a sheen could be visible for as long as about 10 miles. If the winds are stronger, the visible sheen will be smaller. In any case, it is highly unlikely that a noticeable amount will reach shore. The lube oil will be more persistent (see below) but will likely be broken up and dispersed before any land contact is made. In addition, toxicity is generally low to moderate, so we don't expect it to be a substantial environmental threat in an open water environment the expected quantities. 3) OIL FATE: NOAA's ADIOS 2 Oil Weathering Model indicates that less that 10% of the Diesel Fuel will persist on the surface for longer than 24 hours after a release in the average wind conditions of 10 knots. Diesel Fuel: Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as "marine diesel". These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. These oils do not generally present an involved cleanup problem. However, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and can persist as a biological threat in low energy marine environments. Lubricating Oils Lubricating oils are ubiquitous. They are used in all types of engines operating on land, at sea, or in the air. All lubricating oils are composed mainly of high-boiling point (>400 degC) hydrocarbons containing 25 to 40 carbon atoms per molecule. Compound classes that impart undesirable qualities to a lubricant (waxes, polar compounds, and others) are removed in the refining processes. To meet the requirements of many different engine types and operating conditions, a multitude of oil products have been developed. These can be divided into two groups: 1) oils used in continuous service, such as turbine oils and 2) oils used in intermittent service, such as motor oils. Oils used in continuous service operate at a fairly constant temperature for prolonged periods without frequent shutdown or renewal. Stability is of prime importance. Oils used in intermittent service must show little viscosity change with temperature (high viscosity indices). These oils must also be changed at frequent intervals to remove particulates collected during service. Stability of these oils is, therefore, a secondary consideration. Additives Additives are used to improve or impart various properties to the highly refined lubricating base oil. Automotive engine oils can contain a wide variety of additives including metallic detergents or ashless dispersants for controlling deposits, oxidation inhibitors, corrosion inhibitors, anti-wear additives, low temperature flow improvers, viscosity and friction modifiers. Railway locomotive diesel engine oils and marine diesel engine oils typically contain ashless dispersants and metallic detergents. Zinc-free detergents and silver lubricity agents are used where silver bearings are present. Environmental Behavior Lubricating oils, for all their differences in formulation, have many similarities. When spilled into a lake, river, or ocean they will spread rapidly to a thin slick. They will not evaporate, and they will disperse fairly readily in high-energy conditions without the addition of chemical dispersants. In general, lubricating oils will be of low to moderate aquatic toxicity. While the base oils used in the production of lubricating oils are generally of extremely low toxicity to aquatic organisms, the large number of different additives, in varying amounts, make it impossible to issue more specific statements, unless details of the composition (usually proprietary) are known. [SEP] Press Release Date: Oct. 22, 2006 Contact: Lt. j.g. Niya Williams(409) 723-6587 *COAST GUARD MONITORS SUNKEN TOW BOAT OFFSHORE* *PORT ARTHUR, Texas* - Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Port Arthur is responding to the pollution threat and salvage of the 189-foot, U.S.-flagged towing vessel /La Marie/. The /La Marie/ began taking on water when it struck a submerged object in the Gulf of Mexico, and later sank in the process of being towed to shallower water at about 9:45 p.m. Saturday. The Coast Guard is on scene to assist and monitor pollution abatement and clean-up efforts. Initial inspections of the vessel found that the vessel sank in about 40 feet of water, with about two feet of the /La Marie/
The M/V Vagabond, a 180 foot coastal freighter, is aground and leaking in Virgin Gorda, British Virgin Islands. The vessel is reported to have 20,000 gallons of diesel onboard. Vessel location is 18 degrees 24.3'N by 64 degrees 27.7'W. This is off Round Rock Island at the SW end of Gorda I. USCG San Juan requested trajectory assistance from NOAA ERD regarding whether the diesel might affect US waters. [SEP] Received from USCG- [SEP] Date; Oct 19, 2006 To: NOAA USCG Chief Cooper FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded M/V Vagabond off Virgin Gorda Island FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 321-1178. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A 180' M/V is reported hard aground at 18deg 24.3'N by 64deg 27.7'W with an estimated 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel oil onboard. This is off Round Rock Island at the SW end of Virgin Gorda I. It has been reported that oil may be in the water. Off loading of the fuel is reported to have begun. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast from NWS Puerto Rico (AMZ730) .THURSDAY...SOUTH SOUTHWEST WINDS 10 TO 15 KNOTS. SEAS 3 TO 4 FEET IN NORTH SWELLS. SHOWERS AND NUMEROUS THUNDERSTORMS. .THURSDAY NIGHT...SOUTH SOUTHWEST WINDS 12 TO 17 KNOTS. SEAS 4 TO 5 FEET IN NORTH SWELLS. SHOWERS AND NUMEROUS THUNDERSTORMS. .FRIDAY...SOUTH SOUTHWEST WINDS 13 TO 18 KNOTS. SEAS 4 TO 5 FEET IN NORTH SWELLS. NUMEROUS SHOWERS AND SCATTERED THUNDERSTORMS. .FRIDAY NIGHT...SOUTH WINDS 11 TO 16 KNOTS. SEAS 3 TO 5 FEET IN NORTH SWELLS. NUMEROUS SHOWERS AND SCATTERED THUNDERSTORMS. .SATURDAY...SOUTH WINDS 8 TO 13 KNOTS. SEAS 3 TO 5 FEET IN NORTH NORTHEAST SWELLS. NUMEROUS SHOWERS AND SCATTERED THUNDERSTORMS. .SATURDAY NIGHT...SOUTHEAST WINDS 6 TO 9 KNOTS. SEAS 2 TO 4 FEET. SCATTERED SHOWERS AND ISOLATED THUNDERSTORMS. 2) Trajectory Analysis Note ... The wind forecast calls for SSW winds instead of the SW to WSW winds that were previously. This will reduce the threat to Virgin Gorda and the islands between Virgin Gorda and Round Rock I. Thursday: Under the SSW wind conditions at 10 - 15 knots, and 3 -4 ft seas, a spill of 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel would result in a 3 - 4 mile sheen NNE to N of the vessel. It is unlikely the sheen would persist long enough to impact the Dog Island to the north. There is still a risk to Virgin Gorda and the islands between Virgin Gorda and Round Rock Island but the risk is reduced due to the SSW wind direction. Friday: Under the SSW wind conditions at 13 - 18 knots and 4-5 ft seas, a spill of 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel would result in a 2 - 3 mile sheen NNE to N of the vessel. The sheen will not persist long enough to impact the Dog Island to the north. There is still a risk to Virgin Gorda and the islands between Virgin Gorda and Round Rock Island but the risk is reduced due to the SSW wind direction and increased wave mixing. St John's Island which is about 12 nm WSW of the vessel would not be impacted by a 20,000 gallon diesel spill from the grounded vessel. The diesel fuel would not persist long enough to impact St John's Island. 3) Oil Fate Under Thursday wind and sea state Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 13 mph Wave Height = 3.5 ft Water Temperature = 82 deg F Total Amount of Oil Released = 20,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 20,000 - 9 - 3 - 88 3 20,000 14 7 79 4 20,000 - 19 - 13 - 67 5 20,000 24 22 54 6 20,000 - 28 - 32 - 41 7 20,000 30 41 29 8 20,000 - 32 - 48 - 20 9 20,000 32 54 14 Under Friday wind and sea state Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 16 mph Wave Height = 4.5 ft Water Temperature = 82 deg F Total Amount of Oil Released = 20,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 20,000 - 10 - 4 - 85 3 20,000 16 11 73 4 20,000 - 21 - 21 - 58 5 20,000 26 34 40 6 20,000 - 28 - 46 - 25 7 20,000 30 55 15 [SEP] Date; Oct 18, 2006 To: NOAA USCG Chief Cooper FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded M/V Vagabond off Virgin Gorda Island FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 321-1178. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A 180' M/V is reported hard aground at 18deg 24.3'N by 64deg 27.7'W with an estimated 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel oil onboard. This is off Round Rock Island at the SW end of Virgin Gorda I. It has been reported that oil may be in the water. Off loading of the fuel is reported to have begun. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast from NWS Puerto Rico (AMZ730) .WEDNESDAY...SOUTHWEST WINDS 11 TO 16 KNOTS. SEAS 2 TO 4 FEET. NUMEROUS SHOWERS AND SCATTERED THUNDERSTORMS. .WEDNESDAY NIGHT...SOUTHWEST WINDS 11 TO 16 KNOTS. SEAS 2 TO 4 FEET. NUMEROUS SHOWERS AND SCATTERED THUNDERSTORMS. .THURSDAY...WEST SOUTHWEST WINDS 11 TO 16 KNOTS. SEAS 3 TO 4 FEET IN NORTH SWELLS. NUMEROUS SHOWERS AND SCATTERED THUNDERSTORMS. .THURSDAY NIGHT...WEST SOUTHWEST WINDS 8 TO 13 KNOTS. SEAS 4 TO 5 FEET IN NORTH SWELLS. SCATTERED SHOWERS AND ISOLATED THUNDERSTORMS. .FRIDAY...SOUTHWEST WINDS 8 TO 13 KNOTS. SEAS 4 TO 5 FEET IN NORTH SWELLS. ISOLATED THUNDERSTORMS IN THE MORNING. SCATTERED SHOWERS. .FRIDAY NIGHT...SOUTH WINDS 5 TO 9 KNOTS. SEAS 3 TO 5 FEET IN NORTH SWELLS. ISOLATED THUNDERSTORMS. 2) Trajectory Analysis Note ... The winds are predicted to increase along with the seas. This will mean that the oil will evaporate and disperse into the water column quicker and not last as long. Wednesday: Under the WSW wind conditions at 11 - 16 knots, a spill of 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel would result in a 3 - 4 mile sheen ENE to NE of the vessel. The sheen could reach the SW tip of Virgin Gorda Island within 5 hours. The small islands between Virgin Gorda and Round Rock I could also be impacted. Thursday: Under the WSW wind conditions at 8 - 13 knots, and 4 -5 ft seas, a spill of 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel would result in a 2 - 3 mile sheen ENE to NE of the vessel. The sheen could reach the SW tip of Virgin Gorda Island within 6 hours. The small islands between Virgin Gorda and Round Rock I could also be impacted. St John's Island which is about 12 nm WSW of the vessel would not be impacted by a 20,000 gallon diesel spill from the grounded vessel. The diesel fuel would not persist long enough to impact St John's Island. 3) Oil Fate Under Wednesday wind and sea state Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = 3 ft Water Temperature = 82 deg F Time of Initial Release = October 17, 2200 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 20,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 20,000 - 11 - 2 - 87 3 20,000 17 6 77 4 20,000 - 23 - 12 - 66 5 20,000 28 20 52 6 20,000 - 32 - 28 - 40 7 20,000 34 36 30 8 20,000 - 36 - 43 - 22 9 20,000 37 48 15 10 20,000 - 37 - 51 - 11 Under Thursday wind and sea state Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = 4 ft Water Temperature = 82 deg F Time of Initial Release = October 17, 2200 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 20,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 20,000 - 11 - 4 - 85 3 20,000 17 10 73 4 20,000 - 23 - 19 - 58 5 20,000 27 31 42 6 20,000 - 30 - 42 - 28 7 20,000 32 50 18 8 20,000 - 33 - 56 - 12 [SEP] USCG Overflight photo from 10/16/06. Note cargo of cement blocks [SEP]
Oil barge MOR 152 (See name correction on 12/12/06) is a casualty of hurricane Katrina.  During salvage operations of MOR 152 (Case #373), the side of the barge was compromised causing the release of heavy (sinking) oil.  An estimated 30,000 gallons of product were in the punctured hold. The barge is beached on the west bank of the Mississippi River near mile marker 73. [SEP] USCG photograph showing the position of the four MOR barges as salvage work began in Aug. 2006. The two floating barges have since been removed. [SEP] Included are three dive operations photographs. Each photograph shows essentially the same thing - diver and support team members. Yet, each photo is unique and may be of interest. The pictures were taken on 8 Oct. 2006 by NOAA. [SEP] Update, 6 Oct. 2006 Barge Damage and Spill Control: The best information available suggest that a strapping cables cut a 7 foot by 18 inch gash through the wing tank and into one of the center cargo holds. Given that hole in the vessel is rather large, what oil was going to be lost given the current configuration of the barge, may have already been lost. In addition to continue to reconfigure the barge for salvage, the contractor has been directed to assess if any additional oil is being lost from the gash and if the spilled oil observed yesterday has migrated. The barge is current resting on its port side with the stern closest to the right descending bank of the Mississippi River. The gash is located on the stern-side of center along what would normally be the topside of the barge. By righting the barge (and tilting further to starboard if required), the gash and source of the leak would be above the water line. Public Drinking Water Issues: Last evening, the Point-a-la-Hache Waterworks, Port Sulphur Waterworks, and the Boothville-Venice Waterworks water intakes were shutdown after being notified of the incident by the USCG. It remains unclear what the full risk is, but this issue will require additional assessment. [SEP] Photograph of the lifting and removal of the last barge, Case 3730 (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] OVERVIEW: SALVAGE OPERATIONS OF BARGE MOR 171 CONTINUE AT MM 73.1 ON THE LMR, RDB. DIVERS CONTINUE TO PREPARE RIGGING AND ADD CHAFFING PLATES TO EVENLY DISTRIBUTE WEIGHT, THUS PREVENTING FURTHER HULL RUPTURES. THREE CONTRACTOR DIVE SAFETY OFFICERS ARE ON SCENE MONITORING DIVE OPERATIONS AND HAVE REVIEWED THE DIVE SAFETY PLAN.THE PROCEDURE OF DRILLING EXPLORATORY HOLES IS REFERRED TO AS "TAPPING". TAPPING OF THE BARGE DECK HAS BEEN CONDUCTED ON TANKS NUMBER THREE AND FOUR, THE RESULT WAS THAT NO OIL WAS FOUND IN THOSE TANKS. TAPPING OF THE NUMBER TWO TANK IS IN PROGRESS, AND OIL HAS BEEN FOUND AT THE ONE FOOT VERTICAL MARK. A SAMPLE HAS BEEN TAKEN OF NUMBER TWO TANK'S CONTENTS. TAPPING OF THE NUMBER TWO TANK CONTINUES AT ONE FOOT INTERVALS ASCENDING VERTICALLY TO DETERMINE THE OIL CONTENT LEVEL. BOTH THE OIL RECOVERY PLAN AND NOAA WATER SAMPLING PLAN HAVE BEEN COMPLETED. NECESSARY EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL ARE ENROUTE, WITH PERSONNEL ETA 09 OCT 2006 AND VARIOUS COMPONENTS OF OIL RECOVERY EQUIPMENT ARRIVING THROUGH 10 OCT 2006. [SEP] The photo shows the diver entering the Mississippi River from the barge. The Barge MOR171 is resting on its side. [SEP] The USCG has determined that the Barge MOR 171 is the wrong name. The correct name of the current project should be Barge MOR 152. The USCG believes that the sunken barge just downstream of the 152 is the 171. Since that barge will be salvaged next and likely has product onboard as well, we need to be careful about not confusing these two incidents. Please start using MOR 152 for the current project in any documentation. I have changed the Hotline name and corrected the summary information, but older hotline reports have the old name. [SEP] The barge is still being maintained and held in position while lightering is conducted. Lightering operations are continuing on the No. 2 Tank. Storage capacity for the transferred oil and water is a problem. The tank barge has a capacity of 546,000 gallons and is full. In order to continue current operations, the salvage team will either need a second barge or find a way to decant or transfer the contents. A vacuum truck is being used on the No.4 Tank. The product from the No.4 tank is being pumped into a tanks on the shore. There is roughly 250,000 gallons (5,952 BBL'S) of capacity left in the fractionation tanks that have been stage on scene. The next step is to enhance the transfer of the sludge and oil by cutting into the tanks for better access. To accomplish this, the tanks must be inerted. The tentative plan is to use dry ice to inert the tanks. Storage capacity options are still explored. The purpose of lightering is to remove the water, oil, and oil sludge such that the barge can then be loaded onto a deck barge. [SEP] Bucket with tank sludge [SEP] Diagram of water process [SEP] Update, 28 Nov. 2006 If you have been wondering what happened with this barge, this short update will provide an update. Over the last few weeks the salvage contractor has completely reconfigured the lift technique to employ harness plates rather than cables or cables and chaffing plates to lift the barge. These plates are shown in attached photographs. The change was time consuming and costly, but was the viewed as having the least risk of barge failure and additional spills during the recovery. Remember, there are three drinking water intakes located down-stream from the salvage operation. While the closest is 25 river miles away, the operations posed a threat given the characteristics of the oil sludge. During this reconfiguring process, several additional hot-tap connections were made to attempt to pump-off as much residual oil and sludge as possible. Given that the residual doesn't easily flow, this attempt to remove the pollution threat was only partially successful. At present, the NOAA SSC doesn't have a good estimate of the amount of bulk product removed. Far more water than oil was removed during this process, but there was some mitigation. On the morning of 28 November, the lightering barge to receive contaminated water and oil arrived on scene and the lift began using three cranes. By midmorning, the barge had been righted to an angle, or list of approximately 15 degrees and lifted to surface. Pollution response personnel were on-scene during the operation. Once the barge was at the surface, small spills of floating oil did escape the barge and was contained adjacent to the barge. The amount of oil released was not large, and was probably less than 10 bbls. At this point, the cranes could only hold the barge in position because the lift was at near maximum for the smaller of the crane barges (the Ajax Barge, located furtherest from shore). The next step was to begin lightering the barge to create buoyancy so that the cranes can be reconfigured for final lightering and lifting the entire barge onto a deck barge that has been configured specifically for this purpose. When the NOAA SSC departed the scene on 28 November, the initial lightering process was being configured between the sunken barge and the lightering barge. Operations were planned through the night. Once the MOR171 (the barge currently being salvaged) is complete. There is a second sunken barge that must be salvaged and residual non-floating oil pollution at the site evaluated for recovery operations. Additional updates will follow. [SEP] Included are three dive operations photographs. Each photograph shows essentially the same thing - diver and support team members. Yet, each photo is unique and may be of interest. The pictures were taken on 8 Oct. 2006 by NOAA.
At 1050 local time on 9/20/06, a Stone Energy platform at South Timbalier Block 8 had a gas blowout.  The well is releasing 15 MCF/hr (Thousand Cubic Feet) of gas and an unknown volume of oil condensate.  There is a 1 mile by 150 yd silver sheen heading SW from the platform.  USCG has requested WX, trajectory, and explosive limits.  There is a safety zone around the platform. [SEP] Final Report The assessment of the well blowout latter that day identified a valve corrosion failure. The release rate of gas was much less than initially reported. A small leak, characterized as a small plume, less than 6 feet, coming from a point-source corrosion leak. The facility planned to replace the damaged value the next morning. Safety precautions were to remain in place. No addition reports were received from the USCG. It was assumed that the repair was conducted without incident. This report represents the final hotline report. [SEP] GAS WELL BLOWOUT, SOUTH TIMBALIER BLOCK 8, LA 1600 CDT, Wednesday September 20, 2006 Sunset (9/20): 1859 Sunrise (9/21): 0648 Sunset (9/21): 1858 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots becoming E at 10-15 knots after midnight. Thursday, the winds are predicted to be from the SE at 10-15 knots becoming S at 10-15 knots in the evening. _____________________________________ Seas: Today through Tonight, seas are predicted to be 1-3 feet. Thursday, the seas are expected to start out at 2-3 feet and increase to 3-4 by the evening hours. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, no shower activity is expected in the region. Thursday, showers and possible thunderstorms are predicted in the late afternoon. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tonight, clear skies are forecast. Thursday, cloudy skies are expected. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are forecast to be from the S at 15-20 knots. Seas, 3-5 feet protected waters choppy. Cloudy skies with showers and a chance of thunderstorms. Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the S at 10-15 knots. Seas, 3-4 feet, protected waters light to moderate chop. Cloudy skies with showers and a chance of thunderstorms. Sunday, the winds are predicted to be from the S at 5-10 knots. Seas, 1-2 feet, protected waters light chop. Cloudy skies with a chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by USCG Marine Safety Office Morgan City of a well blowout in South Timbalier Bay Block 8 at 1500 hrs on 20 September 2006. The release was reported to have begun 1050 local time. The well is reported to be owned by Stone Energy Inc. The well was reported to be releasing natural gas at a rate of 15 MCF/hr (Thousand Cubic Feet per hour) and an unknown volume of oil condensate. The USCG reported that a 3 mile safety zone has been announced. There is a 1 mile by 150 yd sheen leading to the SW from the blowout. An Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) has been launched to further assess the situation. The USCG has asked for trajectory support relative to the oil release. If the well is discharging mostly gas and very little condensate as reported, the NOAA SSC restated that the biggest response concern would be the potential for an explosion or fire. NOAA is currently working up a series of products to support the response. [SEP] TIME: 1630 Wednesday, Sept. 20, 2006 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Gas Well Blowout, South Timbalier Block 8, LA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at the air hazard and trajectory implications a gas well blowout in South Timbalier Block 8, LA. These notes are based on the following information: At 1050 local time on 9/20/06, a Stone Energy platform at South Timbalier Block 8 had a gas blowout at location 29deg03'13"N 090deg38'24"W. The well is thought to be releasing 15 MCF/hr (Thousand Cubic Feet per hour) of gas and an unknown volume of oil condensate. A 1-mile by 150 yd silver sheen heading SW from the platform has been observed. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WIND: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the northeast at 10-15 knots becoming east at 10-15 knots after midnight. Thursday, the winds are predicted to be from the southeast at 10-15 knots, becoming south at 10-15 knots in the evening. 3) AIR HAZARD: The released gas poses a flammability hazard. To estimate the threat distances, NOAA's air dispersion model, ALOHA, was used to predict the dispersion of the gas. We estimate that the air concentration of methane at sea level drops below 10% of the lower flammability limit less that 100 yards downwind of the source. The well is reported to not be a "sour" well, so we don't expect a potential for a toxic inhalation hazard due to hydrogen sulfide 2) SURFACE OIL TRAJECTORY: There is expected to be a small coastal current moving down coast (to the west) in the region. The movement of any surface oil from condensate will be dominated by the winds. The forecast winds will move the sheen away from shore and to the east this afternoon and evening. Tomorrow morning, when the winds are expected to shift to be from the southeast, any remaining sheen could be moved toward shore. At this time, reports are that the sheen is persisting long enough to extend about 1 mile from the source. If the release rate remains similar, then any sheen moving toward shore will likely be broken up before it reaches shore. In addition, the stronger winds will tend to break up the sheen faster, resulting in a shorter length of persistent sheen. Any small amount of oil that does persist long enough to reach shore will likely beach on Isle Derniers, near Trinity Bay.
Barge grounded near bouys 11 and 12 outside Egmont channel with full load of molten sulfur. [SEP] The sulphur barge Alafia was successfully refloated last night at around 0300 local without any pollution discharge. The barge was taken into Tampa Bay to docks at the Mosaic facility (the phosphate processing plant on the Alafia R. just west of Hwy 41). The bottom type at the grounding was likely sand, but this has still to be confirmed.
Florida DEP/BER reported that approximately 1000 gallons of HFO was released from a containment area at Port Manatee.  Later determined to be a small leak from a 30" unused pipeline that was not under pressure.  The oil was moving into Tampa Bay to the northwest.  A command post was established at Port Manatee Cruise terminal.  Later volume into the water was estimated as 500 gallons of #6 HFO.  Minimal environmental impacts. [SEP] Situation (time 1800 EST) FL DEP reported through FWC that the spill estimate in the water was revised to 2000 gallons of HFO. An overflight indicated that there was recoverable oil in the water. [SEP] CLoser view of spill entry point and tunnel where leaking pipe is located. Photo by NOAA, Jim Jeansonne, 19Sep06. [SEP] Display board showing location of oil on Tampa Bay. Black marks are oil, red dots are cleanup crew locations, "S-2" is location of standby boom staging area. Photo by NOAA, Jim Jeansonne, 19Sep06. [SEP] Cleanup workers removing saturated sorbert boom from water at south seawall of Port Manatee. Photo by NOAA, Jim Jeansonne, 19Sep06. [SEP] Lightly oiled wrack--dead seagrass--on shore at east end of dradge spoil island at Port Manatee. Photo by NOAA, Jim Jeansonne 19Sep06 [SEP] Aerial photo of Port Manatee area, including Dredge Spoil Island just outside of the port. This is a fairly recent image since it shows the recently created wetlands, with its meandering tidal channel, covering the southwest half of the island. Photo of aerial photo poster taken by Jm Jeansonne, NOAA on 20Sep06 (but unknown who produced the original aerial photo). [SEP] I spoke with the USCG Incident Commander, Lt. Commander Lang. He informed me that the spill is estimated to be about 900 gallons of #6 fuel, 500 gallons of which have already been recovered. Most of the spill is contained at the spill site in Port Manatee. Some of the oil did leak past the boom and is in Tampa Bay NE of the Skyway Bridge. The oil is covering an area approximately 500-600 yards long by 200-300 yards wide and there are boats around it cleaning it up. Lt. Comm. Lang informed me that the boats involved in the clean up process will alert us if any marine mammals or sea turtles enter the oiled area. They have also contracted a helicopter to do overflys and 3 flights were already done this afternoon. The parties involved have our stranding pager number and my cell phone number should any dolphins interact with the oil. Teri and I spoke we believe the area of the oil in Tampa Bay has sufficient coverage to notify us if a dolphin comes into the area and the area isn't large enough to warrant us positioning a person on a boat for behavioral studies. At this point, we have alerted the local network and are on standby unless we receive a page. Please let me know if you have any questions, Jenny [SEP] Bow of workboat just below water surface at dock. Boat was swamped by a severe thunderstorm the night before. Photo by NOAA, Jim Jeansonne, 19Sep06. [SEP] 0850 hr - The morning brief was delayed until about 1130hrs due to severe thunderstorms last night and this morning associated with a cold frontal passage, delaying some cleanup operations, the morning overflight, and overall traffic issues. Cleanup operations are wrapping up the final recovery of small amounts of free oil and mostly sheen in the confines of the port and just outside the port entrance. None of this floating oil is a threat to sensitive shoreline habitats. The shorelines of the port itself are all vertical hardened seawalls. No oil of any amount was observed out in the bay or on shorelines outside of the port itself during todays overflight by the RP and CG. The heavy rains and winds that have occurred in the last two days have likely disbursed the little floating oil slicks that had remained as of yesterday afternoon. There have been no reports of wildlife or fish impacts. The RP is working today to hot tap the leaking pipeline and transfer any remaining oil in the 30" unused line to another active pipeline, then permanently cap the leaking one. There has been no further discharge of oil into the environment since the initial discharge was reported. The FPL spill response effort is more typical of a 10,000+ gallon spill than a 1000 gallon one. NOAA Natural Resource Scientist, Jim Jeansonne departed the command post at 1200 today. Additional response data (GIS maps and reports) is to be sent to NOAA by the FPL Environmental Unit staff in the next several days. This data will be shared with ORR staff as soon as it is received. [SEP] Overflights have indicated that an area of sheen with some thin rows of free product are out on the bay NE of the SkyWay bridge and north of the ship channel. The sheen may not be recoverable, but a response boat cannot get to the site due to local thunderstorms. Another area of recoverable oil is located in the bay about 1 mile NW of Port Manatee. Responders are working to clean that up before it impacts the shoreline at Cockroach Bay. A source oil sample is in the process of being taken as soon as jars are obtained. This will be observed by NOAA rep. and kept under chain of custody. Light patchy oiling of about a 200' long section of shoreline occurred on the east side of the dredge spoil island just outside of Port Manatee. Jim Jeansonne, NOAA SST [SEP] Site of oil entry into the water--place where the lower seawall joins the taller one. Photo by NOAA, Jim Jeansonne, 19Sep06. [SEP] Situation The State reports the UC estimated volume is currently 900 gallons of oil released with 400-500 gallons in the water (1820 EST). USCG last reported that the spill was from a pipeline and that although the source had not been secured, the oil was being recovered from containment by vac trucks.
The M/V Clipper Lasco carrying a cargo of bauxite grounded inshore of the anchorage outside Port Everglades at 1245 EST Sept 14, 2006 [SEP] Tidal heights [SEP] The vessel was successfully refloated and will undergo thourough hull and rudder inspections. The UC held a debreif of the response with CG, RP, State, and NOAA. Lessons learned will be reviewed and incorporated into future response planning. The county will lead efforts to assess damage to the reef. [SEP] Situation A conference call was held for the command and general staff mtg at noon. The U/C is still waiting for results of this mornings dive ops which was conducted to evaluate vessel movement and determine the best egress route. Plans have been presented and approved and will be distributed later today in a comprehensive action plan. Lightering of cargo is expected to commence this evening and continue for 24 hours in order to remove 2000 MT of bauxite IAW with the approved plan. [SEP] photo by Stephen Threet, FL DEP [SEP] provided by FWC-FWRI [SEP] Tidal Hieghts: Sept 16-18 [SEP] photo by RP [SEP] Photos taken during an underwater survey by Florida Dept of Fish & Wildlife [SEP] M/V CLIPPER LASCO, FORT LAUDERDALE, FL 1130 EDT, Wednesday September 20, 2006 Sunset (9/20): 1920 Sunrise (9/21): 0710 Sunset (9/21): 1919 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, winds are forecast to be from the W to NW at 10-15 knots. This afternoon thunderstorms may precede the passage of a cold front through the region causing wind gust to 30 knots. Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 5-10 knots. Thursday, the winds are predicted to be from the NE at 5-10 knots. _____________________________________ Seas: Today, nearshore the seas are predicted to be 2 feet or less with a light chop in the intracoastal waters. Tonight, seas are expected to be 2 feet or less with a light chop in the intracoastal waters. Offshore seas are expected to be 3-5 feet. Thursday, nearshore seas are forecast to be 2-3 feet with the offshore seas coming down to 2-4 feet in the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tonight, numerous showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Thursday, no shower activity is expected. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high is expected to be in the low 90's and the low in the mid 70's. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tonight, cloudy skies are forecast. Thursday, sunny skies are expected. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, winds are predicted to be from the NE 5-10 knots. Seas, 2-3 feet with a light chop on the intracoastal waters. Mostly sunny skies with no showers and thunderstorms. Saturday, winds are forecast to be from the E 5-10 knots increasing in the afternoon hours to 10-15 knots. Seas, 2-4 feet with a moderate chop on the intracoastal waters. Mostly sunny skies giving away to isolated showers and thunderstorms in the evening. Sunday, winds are predicted to be from the E at 10-15 knots. Seas, 2 or less. Partly cloudy skies with isolated showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] M/V CLIPPER LASCO, FORT LAUDERDALE, FL 0930 EDT, Tuesday September 19, 2006 Sunset (9/19): 1921 Sunrise (9/20): 0709 Sunset (9/20): 1920 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, winds are forecast to be from the S at 5-10 knots becoming SW at 10-15 knots in the afternoon hours. Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the W at 5-10 knots increasing to 10-15 knots after midnight. Wednesday, the winds are predicted to be from the W at 10-15 knots becoming NW at 10-15 knots in the evening. _____________________________________ Seas: Today, seas are predicted to be 2 feet or less building t 2-4 feet by the afternoon. Tonight through Wednesday, seas are expected to be 2-4 feet building to be 3-5 feet in the afternoon. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high is expected to be in the low 90's and the low near 80. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Wednesday, partly cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, winds are predicted to be from the N 10-15 knots becoming 5-10 knots in the afternoon hours. Seas, 2-4 feet. Partly cloudy skies with isolated showers and thunderstorms. Friday, winds are predicted to be from the E 5-10 knots. Seas, 2 feet or less smooth on the intracoastal waters. Partly cloudy skies with isolated showers and thunderstorms. Saturday, winds are expected to be from the E 10-15 knots. Seas, 2 feet or less light chop on intracoastal waters. Partly cloudy skies with scattered showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Photos taken during an underwater survey by Florida Dept of Fish & Wildlife [SEP] Photo provided by FL DEP
On September 6, 2006 an oil spill was discovered at the Conoco Phillips Bayway Refinery, Carteret, New Jersey. The source was a 6 inch pipeline which hadn't been used in 15 years. It appears that the pipeline failure was due to corrosion. USCG and Conoco Phillips estimates that between 2,000-3,000 gallons of residual No. 6 oil spilled into a small freshwater pond that is located on the refinery's property. The pond is connected to Morris's Mill Creek which is tidal and eventually discharges into the Arthur Kill. Some oil did flow from the pond into the creek, but it was contained by fence boom, no oil made its way into the Arthur Kill. [SEP] Photo of decaying pipes and supports(Csulak Photo) [SEP] Photo of skimming devices (Csulak Photo) [SEP] Photo of pipeline(Csulak Photo) [SEP] On May 17, 2007 officials from USCG (LePouttre, Breimer), USEPA (Harrington) and NOAA (Csulak) met with Conoco Phillips(CP)at the spill site for the purpose of conducting a final site assessment and closing out this response activity. CP showed the new sheet piling and concrete wall that was constructed to isolate the pond water where the spill occurred from entering Morses Creek which downstream flows into the Arthur Kill. The man-made pond was formed as a result of dredged material being disposed there from on- site maintenance of Morses Creek. The spill area is also part of a large ongoing Exxon Mobile remediation site. Back in the early 1980's there was a liquid asphalt spill at this same location and there still remains a significant amount of residual asphalt in the sediment below the surface and adhered to several above ground and below ground pipes (not in service) and a culvert that previouly allowed water to drain from the pond into Morses Creek. Now that the pilings and concrete wall has been installed, there is no water exchange between the pond and the creek, thereby preventing any oily residue from entering the creek. A vac truck regularly inspects the culvert area and removes any oily residue that accumulates on the pond side of the new wall. We did a visual assessment of the pond where the spill occurred and found minimal sheen (mostly organic matter)and staining. The vegetation surrounding the pond has for the most part fully recovered, including a significant amount of new growth. We observed several different bird species feeding in or near the pond. Other than continued maintenance of the culvet area with the vac truck on an as need basis, the agencies agreed that no further response actions were necessary. We also conducted a visual inspection at the most downstream dam/culvert on site before Morses Creek enters the Arthur Kill and did not observe any sheening. [SEP] Prepared by Frank Csulak: On September 6, 2006, an oil spill was discovered at the Conoco Phillips Bayway Refinery, Carteret, New Jersey. The source was a 6 inch pipeline which hadn't been used in 15 years. It appears that the pipeline failure was due to corrosion. USCG and Conoco Phillips estimates that between 2,000-3,000 gallons of residual No. 6 oil spilled into a small freshwater pond that is located on the refinery's property. The pond is connected to Morris's Mill Creek which is tidal and eventually discharges into the Arthur Kill. Some oil did flow from the pond into the creek, but it was contained by fence boom, no oil made its way into the Arthur Kill. On September 8, the USCG contacted the NOAA SSC and requested assistance with recommending appropriate response actions. On September 10th, the NOAA SSC met with the NJDEP OSC, the USCG OSC, and Conoco Phillips response unit to view the spill site and discuss remedial options. Shoreline clean up around the pond and was underway with the use of vac trucks and floating disc skimmers. Several dozen contractors were cutting and removing oiled fragmitties and other debris along the pond's shoreline. NOAA SSC made recommendation to employ the use of snare to collect and remove oil in the very shallow areas of the pond . The snare proved to be very effective . In addition, SSC made recoomendation to use high volume, low pressure flushing to move oil from shoreline into the pond where vac trucks and skimmers can recovery oil.. This was implemented and was also working very effectively. As of 9/11, Conoco Phillips recovered about 500 gallons of oil. Tri-State was brought in over the weekend. Three oiled birds ( 2 mallards and 1 sandpiper) were caught and are undergoing rehab at Tri-State's facility in Delaware. On 9/11 the SSC met with NJDEP, USCG, and Conoco Phillips to review status of incident and plans for continuing response actions. Objective is to remove as much recoverable oil from pond, and continue to boom creek to prevent any oil from reaching Arthur Kill. Once recoverable oil has been removed, focus will be on removing any remaining oiled vegeation and debris along the shoreline. [SEP] Photo of skimming devices and oiled wetland (Csulak Photo) [SEP] Photo of skimming devices (Csulak Photo) [SEP] This is an update on clean up activities based on Sept. 25 site visit and meeting with USCG and Conoco Phillips. 1) No floating or recoverable oil observed on surface water of pond. USCG and NOAA agreed that overall, conditions looked very good relative to what conditions looked like the previous week. 2) Shoreline around pond was thoroughly flushed with high volume, low pressure water flow. Did not see any oil droplets along any of the shoreline areas, except directly adjacent to culvert. Very little light sheen observed anywhere along shoreline. Recommendation from USCG and NOAA was for CP to maintain sweep along the shoreline until further determination by USCG, NOAA, and NJDEP to collect any sheen that may come of the shoreline and also to prevent or minimize any sheen appearing in the open pond water from recontaminating the shoreline. Sweep will be inspected 2x per day and changed out as needed during dry weather. After any rain event sweep was to be changed out. CP agreed to this recommendation. 3) Floating oil, including droplets and small streamers were observed directly adjacent to the south culvert, throughout the drainage way between the south and north culverts, and immediately outside the north culvert. A large part of the problem is historical oil contamination and limited access to culvert where is passes underground beneath railroad track. Appears that some amount of oil remains underground between the two culverts. USCG and NOAA recommended that CP continue to flush the drainage way with high volume, low pressure water to attempt to flush out as much remaining oil as practical. Also recommended that a combination of vac trucks and sweep be used to recover remaining floating oil. Vac trucks will only work day time hours, no night time operations. CP agreed to follow up on this recommendation. 5) No oil or sheen was observed in Morse's Mills Creek at any time. CP continues to maintain boom in creek as before. 6) CP will contact us when they beleive that as much oil has been recovered as practical from the culvert area. At that time we will make arrangements to conduct another site visit. 7) Pipeline responsible for the spill was being prepared for the water flush. All residual oil had been removed from pipeline previously. After the water flush, pipeline will be removed. Rinse water will be sent to on site water/oil separator for treatment/disposal. [SEP] The cleanup is still not complete. Conditions in the "pond" continue to improve but Conoco Phillips (CP) is still maintaining sweep within it to capture any sheen that surfaces from below the shoreline surface. The culvert area continues to release small oil globules and sheen so CP continue to have a vacuum truck work it during the day. Absorbents continue to be used and maintained in the culvert. [SEP] Attended IAP meeting with USCG, NJDEP and Conoco Phillips on 9/18/06. Visited spill site to evaluate ongoing clean up activities. The majority of the floating oil has been recovered. Focus now on remediating oiled shorelines and 2 culverts. USCG, NJDEP and NOAA SSC made the following recommendations to enhance the collection and removal of residual oil: 1) continue raking and removing oiled debris, including vegetation from shorelines that continue to emit sheen; 2) use large volume, low pressure flushing to remove surface oiling from shoreline areas to reduce sheening; 3) continue to use snare and vac trucks to collect oil being flushed off of shoreline sediments; 4) use mild bio- degradable detergent with warm water power washing on hard structures (i.e. bricks, pipes, metal hardware) in the two culverts and recover oil with vac trucks. No oil/sheen observed in Morse's Mill Creek that discharges into Arthur Kill. Conoco Phillips estimates the volume of the spill to be 2,500 gallons of #6 oil. Conoco Phillips in process of taking leaking oilline out of service. first task is to remove any additional oil remaining in pipieline and then water ws
M/V Toro grounded in the St. Lawrence Seaway near Massena, NY.  While the bow grounded on the Canadian side of the Seaway and encountered some damage, the stern (and pollution threat) remained in US waters. [SEP] M/V TORO, ST LAWRENCE SEAWAY, NY 1600 EDT, Wednesday September 6, 2006 Sunset (9/06): 1941 Sunrise (9/07): 0645 Sunset (9/07): 1940 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight through Thursday morning, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 5-10 knots. Late Thursday morning through Thursday night, the winds are predicted to be from the SW at 5-10 knots. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Thursday, chance of showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Thursday, cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high temperature is expected to be in the mid 70's the low is predicted to be in the mid 50's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are forecast to be from the SW at 10-15 becoming NE at 5-15 knots overnight. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the NE at 5-15. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Date: 1600 EDT September 6, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Steve Lehmann  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: M/V Toro, St Lawrence Seaway, NY FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of fate and transport from a potential release of heavy fuel oil from a grounded vessel. These notes are based on the following information: The M/V Toro is reported grounded at the bow but not leaking. The vessel is located on the US and Canadian border at 45 deg N, 074 deg 40'W off the southeast side of Cornwall Island in the St Lawrence Seaway. The vessel is taking on water at the focsle, but considered stable. HAZMAT has been requested to provide a trajectory for 10,000 gallons of #6 fuel oil while the response team awaits further information on the fuel type and amount on board. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds are forecast to be from the NE at 5-10 knots until midmorning Thursday, then SW 5-10 knots through Friday. 2) Trajectory The currents through the St Lawrence Seaway are controlled by the outflow from Lake Ontario. Under such light forecast wind conditions the oil would move mostly with the currents, with the wind potentially biasing shoreline impacts. Based on the St Lawrence Seaway Commission estimates of flow for this week of 7060 m3/sec, we estimate that the currents in the deeper channel near the vessel grounding are between 2 -- 3 knots. Oil released from the vessel could go 50-70 nm downstream in a 24-hours period toward Montreal. The winds from the NE today and tomorrow morning indicate that north facing shorelines would be more likely to be contacted by oil than southward facing shorelines. 3) Oil Weathering and Fate Heavy Refined Products Heavy refined products, such as Intermediate Fuel Oils (IFO), Fuel Oil No. 6 and Bunker C, are more persistent than lighter refined products. The refining process has removed the lighter components and left them somewhat pre-weathered. As a result they can present quite persistent floating pollutant problems. These oils do occasionally form an emulsion, but usually only slowly, and after a period of days. These oils do not spread into very thin films and often simply break up into smaller patches and then tarballs. It is also common for these oils to lose enough of their light ends so that they do not rapidly form sheens and the resulting scattered tarball fields are very difficult to observe using visual, or remote sensing techniques. This, combined with the persistence of the tarballs, makes these kinds of spills quite likely to result in long range, and occasionally unexpected, beach impacts. Fuel Oil No. 6 has a much lower vapor pressure than diesel and will thus be less volatile. The proportion lost to evaporation will be small as will the amount permanently dispersed into the water column. Fuel Oil No. 6 can emulsify with a typical water content of around 30% but usually does so slowly.  Oil Name = FUEL OIL NO.6 API = 12.3 Pour Point = 59 deg F  Wind Speed = constant at 7 knots Wave Height = computed from winds  Water Temperature = 60 deg F Time of Initial Release = September 6, 1200 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 10,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent  1 10,000 - 1 - 0 - 99 2 10,000 1 0 99 4 10,000 - 3 - 0 - 97 8 10,000 4 0 96 12 10,000 - 5 - 0 - 94 16 10,000 6 0 94 20 10,000 - 6 - 1 - 93 24 10,000 6 1 93 30 10,000 - 6 - 1 - 93 36 10,000 7 1 42 10,000 - 7 - 1 - 92 48 10,000 7 1 92 54 10,000 - 7 - 1 - 91 60 10,000 7 1 91 66 10,000 - 8 - 2 - 91 72 10,000 8 2 91 78 10,000 - 8 - 2 - 90 84 10,000 8 2 90 90 10,000 - 8 - 2 - 90 96 10,000 8 2 90 102 10,000 - 8 - 2 - 90 108 10,000 8 2 90 114 10,000 - 8 - 2 - 89 120 10,000 8 2 89
Barge grounded outside channel while entering Florida Power & Light Turkey Point Facility in Biscayne Bay [SEP] SITREP #2 Barge successfully refloated at 2048 local and continued on to the facility. No pollution occurred. Case closed.
Potential JP-5 Fuel Storage tank damage incurred from impending SuperTyphoon Strike. [SEP] These tanks were not in use. [SEP] The potential for significant pollution response now appears limited and the NOAA team is wrapping up loose ends and is preparing to demob. The Unified Command is expected to remain in operation until the USCG strike team completes their ground recon efforts. NOAA will continue to provide support for weather and be available for general consultation. Tomorrow AM will focus on collating and providing documents, video and still photographs to the Unified Command. Departure is scheduled for PM [SEP] WAKE ISLAND FORECAST Sept 5, 2006. 0745HST ==================================================================================================== Aviation Forecast-Issued by U S Air Force, Hickam AFB, HI (PHIK) TAF PWAK 051111 09016KT 9999 SCT020 BKN030 OVC250 QNH2972INS BECMG 1415 11013KT 9999 VCSH SCT015 BKN030 BKN100 OVC200 QNH2965INS TEMPO 1523 6000 -SHRA VCTS BKN015 BKN030CB OVC100 TEMPO 1720 15015G25KT 3200 -TSRA BECMG 0304 17010KT 9999 NSW FEW015 SCT035 OVC250 QNH2964INS T29/02Z T26/18Z LIMITED METWATCH 0511 TIL 0522 ===================================================================================== Wednesday 6 September 2006 (Wake LST) Sunrise 6:39AM Sunset 7:06PM Wind Wednesday: Southeast 15 mph in the morning...shifting South and decreasing to around 10 mph in the afternoon. Wednesday night: South 10 mph in the evening...shifting Southwest and increasing to around 15 to 20 mph after midnight. Temperatures MaxT 84 MinT 75 Combined Seas Tuesday: 5 to 7 feet Tuesday night: 5 to 7 feet Weather Wednesday and Wednesday night: Cloudy. Scattered showers in the early morning, becoming numerous heavy showers with isolated thunderstorms by afternoon and persisting through the night. Visibilities may fall as low as 1 mile in heavy showers. ===================================================================================== Thursday 7 September 2006 (Wake LST) Sunrise 6:40AM Sunset 7:04PM Wind Thursday: Southwest 15 to 20 mph Thursday night: Southwest 15 mph Temperatures MaxT 84 MinT 76 Combined Seas Tuesday: 5 to 7 feet Tuesday night: 5 to 7 feet Weather Thursday: Cloudy with numerous heavy showers and isolated thunderstorms in the early morning...then mostly cloudy with scattered showers and a slight chance of thunderstorms by afternoon. Visibilities may fall as low as 1 mile in heavy showers. Thursday night: Mostly cloudy with scattered showers and a slight chance of thunderstorms. Visibilities may fall as low as 2 miles in heavy short-duration showers. Heavy showers are expected to occur infrequently. ===================================================================================== Long Range (Wake LST) Cloud cover, weather and wind on Friday and Saturday will depend heavily on the progress of the circulation south of Wake. At this point, expect weather conditions to remain very similar to Wednesday and Thursday. It should be noted that the forecast confidence is low due to the uncertainty in the circulation's exact track...size and intensity over the next 72 hours. Model consensus is to develop this circulation slowly and track it in a northerly direction, very close to Wake. The poorly-defined center of this circulation is near 14N166E, which is around 375 miles south of Wake. With the system already close to Wake, and not expected to rapidly develop, it will most likely pass Wake bringing minimal wind and seas to the island. However, given the circulation is clearly identifiable and recognized by all the models, we will be watching its progress closely and update you with any changes to our current thinking. Seas should remain around 5 to 6 feet Friday and Saturday with no significant changes expected at this point. Sarah Prior [SEP] Some roofing debris next to fuel trucks on runway taxi area. [SEP] Typhoon Forecast, Navy JTWC [SEP] Arrived at USCG command post on Sand Island at 1300. Ian Zelo arrived at 1630. Received briefing from Unified Command and set up work space in USCG conference room. Provided USCG with wx and trajectory products. Initially the USCG requested NOAA participation in C-130 flight from Hawaii to Wake but security concerns over a planned refueling stop and overnight at Kwajalein required that NOAA staff have secret clearance. After discussion with CDR Roger Laferriere (Deputy FOSC) and Seattle, it was decided that the primary need was scientific support and information management, rather than overflight support. Demain Bailey was on standby to come to Hawaii to join the C-130 flight but was turned off. This turned out to be fortunate since the C-130 flight was moved up by 12 hours and Demian would have still been enroute from Seattle when the flight left Barbers Point Airstation. After straigtening out NOAA roles and needs, I prepared and participated in briefings for the general staff meeting, command staff briefing, and D14 conference call. Airforce provided USCG with a set of approximately 600 pre-evacuation photos showing an array of potential environmental hazards ranging from large tanks to unsecured drums of waste oils. USCG has asked that we review these pictures and link representative images to a large situation map. USCG has also asked NOAA to prepare a broad scale circulation map of the waters around Wake to help evaluate where potential floating debris might be a problem At this point there is still no knowledge of the conditions on Wake and the extent of damage, but there is an extensive list of potential oil tanks, vehicles, and contaminants. I have posted a map with the major tank locations and posted 4 excel spreadsheets with detailed lists of all contaminants, ranging from 2.7 million gallons of JP-5 to individual bottles of kitchen cleansers. The first images from the C-130 flight are anticipated to be sent electronically late tomorrow afternoon. At that point we will have a better understanding of the long-term need for a NOAA presence at the command post. On-scene: Helton, Zelo [SEP] The USCG Strike Team has completed their ground assessment survey and reported via radio (see note below) on the status of each major tank. No significant pollution was observed. The liquids in the tank berms were found to be water. The emergency generators were running. This was a concern of base personnel since there is a large quantity of frozen food in storage. The USCG Cutter Sherman is underway and the Unified Command at Sector is standing down. The USCG no longer requests wx and NOAA HAZMAT is standing down in support. The follow summary report was received from the ground assessment team: "All tanks, pipelines, and conex boxes found intact and not leaking. Only one tank (41118 MOGAS) moved from its pre-storm location, found empty. One Conex was moved and placed on its side. Two intermodal tanks moved against pipelines, but found no damage. Conex box containing radiation source was located in expected position, readings below SMAC levels. Runway found in pristine condition, but with some debris on taxiway (small brush, seaweed, several runway lights). Most vehicles had flat tires. Lots of debris on roads, downtown and OPS industrial area." Note that the one MOGAS tank was already identified as moved, and was empty and slated for demolition (See ResponseLink report on September 4). A final note that may be of interest: A survey form was prepared for the 22 largest tanks on the island. The ground survey data was then coded into an alphanumeric string for ease of radio transmission. Each tank has the following data: Tank#/Damage/Spill/Follow-up/Sounded/Photographed, using the following codes: Location: O=original, U=Unknown, M=Moved, (location known) Damage: U=Undamaged, L=Light, M=Moderate, S=severe Spill: N=no spill, P= Potential, 0= spill occurred, G= Seepage, S= currently spilling Follow-up: N=Not required, D= Delayed, I= immediate Sounded: N=Not Sounded, otherwise % full Photographed: N=no, otherwise # is count of images. For example, Tank One was in its original location, undamaged, no follow-up required, 0% (empty), with 2 photographs taken was coded as 01/O/U/N/N/0/2 Using these codes allowed the SCAT team to easily transmit the status of all of the tanks in a short paragraph radio transmission. NOAA was provided copies of the survey forms and results if needed. [SEP] Landing craft in small boat harbor were undamaged. Small fuel tank in bottom of picture was not moved. [SEP] Bldg damage on Wake Island. Older buildings and structures appear to have suffered the greatest damage. Photo from USCG C-130 Overflight [SEP] PDF map of operational zones on Island. Overall ranking of HAZMAT risk based on discussions with Brian Whitehouse, Wake Island Environmental Flight Office, Compliance Manager [SEP] second image [SEP] SUPER TYPHOON IOKE, WAKE ISLAND 1130 CDT, Wednesday July 26, 2006 Sunrise (9/01): 0641 Sunset (9/01): 1857 Sunrise (9/02): 0640 Sunset (9/02): 1856 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, the winds are forecast to be from the S at 50-60 knots. Tonight through Saturday, the winds are expected to continue from the S at 35-40 knots. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, rain and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Tonight through Saturday, rain and thunderstorms are expected to continue. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Temperature: The high temperature is expected to be in the upper 80's the low is predicted to be in the low 80's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 15-20 knots. Rain and thunderstorms are forecast. Monday, the winds are forecast to be
NOAA HAZMAT was contacted to assist in hindcasting a body found on June 27, 2006 floating near Cape May, NJ. For more details, please contact the SSC or C.J. Beegle-Krause.
NOAA HAZMAT was contacted to assist in hindcasting a body found on June 9, 2006 floating off the New Jersey coast.  For more details, please contact the SSC or C.J. Beegle-Krause.
The NOAA SSC was notified of a fishing vessel that had capsized and was adrift near Santa Cruz Island, CA.  An estimated 200 gallons of diesel were on board when she capsized and sheen was observed by USCG during rescue operations.  The drift trajectory may take the vessel aground.  The vessel is reported to be in the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary.  The Island is managed by the National Park Service. USCG requested weather support. [SEP] Attached is the afternoon incident brief for RRT-9 members, prepared by USCG District-11 staff. J Stout, SSC California [SEP] The following is a status brief of the F/V Five Gs incident provided by USCG District 11 staff on 14 July, 2006 (pictures and removal plan are separate Hotline postings): F/V FIVE Gs INCIDENT BRIEF -- SANTA CRUZ ISLAND, CA, 14 JUL 06, 1400 Vessel Particulars Length: 35 ft Hull Type: Aluminum Type of fuel: diesel and lube Potential oil o/b: 200 gallons Vessel's Position (see attach pictures) <<MVC-652X.JPG>> <<MVC-646X.JPG>> * 34 01.00N * 119 37.33W * (vsl is capsized, 50 ft offshore Chinese Harbor, Santa Cruz Island: National Marine Sanctuary) * Vessel boomed and anchored Current Situation (Actions Taken) * CGC Halibut o/s with MSD Santa Barbara * NRC on scene with Boats and Divers C for salvage operations * Salvage plan was submitted and approved * NRC is preparing for fuel removal On Scene WX and 24 HR WX Forecast * HI tide 1328 = 4.02' , 0036 = 4.80' * Low tide 0715 = (1.2') 1854 = 1.81' * Low cloud cover * Today: West winds 10-20 kts, patchy fog in the morning. * Seas 4-5 ft Plans * Remove fuel * Float boat * Remove debris * Secure nets * Tow boat to Santa Barbara (see attach Removal Plan) <<NRCES MV Five G'S Plan.pdf>> [SEP] Wide angle view of F/V Five Gs grounded near Santa Cruz Island prior to booming and removal operations. Note net spool on aft deck and floating debris surrounding vessel Photo provided by USCG. JStout, SSC California [SEP] Oblique aerial photo of the F/V Five Gs taken 13 July, 2006 by USCG helicopter crewmember. JStout, SSC California [SEP] Closer view of F/V Five Gs grounded near Santa Cruz Island prior to booming and removal operations. Note floating debris surrounding vessel. Photo provided by USCG. JStout, SSC California [SEP] Initial report, 12 July 2006 On 11 July, the US Coast Guard responded to a call involving the 35 foot F/V Five Gs, whose nets were deployed when she started taking water over the stern and capsized near Santa Cruz Island. The three crewmembers attempted to swim to shore but only one survived and was rescued. The USCG located the floating, yet overturned vessel and noted sheen and floating debris nearby. A self-locating data buoy was attached to the hull and the vessel's drift was tracked to a location near the shoreline of Chinese Harbor, Santa Cruz Island (34deg 01.02'N, 119deg 37.33'W).  When interviewed, the owner claimed that the vessel had a maximum fuel capacity of 400 gallons but estimated approximately 200 gallons of diesel were aboard at the time of the mishap. Because the vessel's condition and potential pollution threat are currently unknown, a patrol boat has been dispatched and a helicopter overflight is scheduled for tomorrow at first light. Based on the morning scene assessment, removal alternatives will be evaluated by USCG, the State of California, Channel Islands NMS and Channel Islands NP. WX support was requested by the USCG. Jordan Stout, SSC California [SEP] Drifting Vessel F/V Five Gs 0000 PDT, Thursday, July 13, 2006  NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region.  Sunrise (7/13): 5:56 a.m. Sunset (7/13): 8:13 p.m  Sunrise (7/14): 5:57 a.m. Sunset (7/14): 8:12 p.m  ** Warnings and Notes**  Occasional Dense patchy fog.  **************  36 Hour Forecast. --------------------------  Winds and Precipitation:  Today -- W winds 10 to 15, then up to 20 kt. in the afternoon. Patchy fog in the morning.  Tonight -- W winds 10 to 20 kt., strongest in the late afternoon. Patchy fog after about 3:00am.  Friday -- W winds about 10 kt. in the morning, then 10 to 20 kt. with gusts to 25 kt.in the afternoon. Patchy fog in the morning.  Friday night -- W winds 10 to 20 kt. Dense patchy fog after midnight.  Waves:  Today and tonight -- Seas 2-3 ft.  Friday and Friday night -- Seas 4-5 ft.
At 1100 CDT this morning a slick approx. 12 nm x 2 nm of sheen to black oil was discovered approx. 60 nm offshore of Port Au Fer Island.  Position of the slick was given as 28 deg 11.06'N, 091 deg 16.12'W.  Another slick was reported of unknown time at 28 deg 24.41'N, 091 deg 16.32'W.  A platform nearby is located at 28 deg 19.54'N, 091 deg 12.18'W [SEP] Date: 1500 CDT July 11, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Mystery Spill, Offshore Port Au Fer, LA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of evaporation from mystery slick discovered this morning. These notes are based on the following information: At 1100 CDT this morning a slick approx. 12 nm x 2 nm of sheet to black oil was discovered approx. 60 nm offshore of Port Au Fer Island. Position of the slick was given as 28 deg 11.06'N, 091 deg 16.12'W. Another slick was reported of unknown time at 28 deg 24.41'N, 091 deg 16.32'W. A platform nearby is located at 28 deg 19.54'N, 091 deg 12.18'W If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Tonight through Wednesday winds are forecast to be from the SE at 5-10 knots. Thursday winds are predicted to be from the E 5-10 knots. 2)Trajectory The slick is located well offshore. We do not expect that this oil would contact the shoreline under such light forecast wind conditions. [SEP] MYSTERY SPILL, 60 nm offshore Port au Fer Island, LA 1500 CDT, Tuesday, July 11, 2006 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (7/11): 2005 CDT Sunrise (7/12): 0617 CDT Sunset (7/12): 2005 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight winds from the SE at 5-10 knots Wednesday SE 5-10 knots Wednesday night SE 5-10 knots Thursday E 5-10 knots Thursday night E 5-10 knots Waves: Tonight seas 2 feet Wednesday seas 1-2 feet Precipitation: Tonight slight chance of rain Wednesday isolated showers and thunderstorms, mostly in the afternoon. Extended Forecast -- Days 3-5: Friday winds SE 5-10 knots, seas 1-2 feet, scattered showers and thunderstorms. Friday night winds SE 5-10 knots, seas 1-2 feet, isolated showers and thunderstorms. Saturday winds SE 5-10 knots, seas 1-2 feet, scattered showers and thunderstorms. Saturday night winds E 5-10 knots, seas 1-2 feet, isolated showers and thunderstorms. Sunday winds SE 5-10 knots, seas 1-2 feet, isolated showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. NOAA's support role was limited to remote trajectory support.
Sheen reported 125 nautical miles offshore LA. [SEP] Date; July 7, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Willie Whitmore FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery Sheen off Louisiana FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A sheen has been reported approximately 120 nm offshore of Grand Lake Louisiana at 27deg 43' N by 92deg 49' W. The sheen was originally reported on July 4. It is in the vicinity (within hundreds of yards), of a new submersible rig. A skimmer onscene reports that there isn't enough oil to skim or pickup with sorbants. The sheen this morning was tending to the NE. No distance was reported. The East Flower Gardens Bank is about 40 nm to the W of the reported sheen. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast The forecast is for winds to be 5 knots or less and E to SE in direction into Monday of next week. Seas are expected to be 0.5 - 2 feet into Monday. 2) Trajectory Analysis The reported slick extending to the NE is consistent with the known conditions. Winds are light (less than 5 knots and variable) and the TABS buoys near the Flower Gardens (buoys N and V) show current to the ENE at about 1/3 - 1/2 knot over the last few days. With the continued forecast of light winds into Monday and the persistence of the currents over the last few days, we expect any oil spilled over the next few days to continue to move to the E to NE. The distance the sheen is observed would depend upon how much oil is lost which is an unknown. The sheen does not appear to be a threat to the Flower Gardens because: There does not appear to be enough oil being spilled to persist for 40 nm. The currents have been to the E and NE which moves things away from the Flower Gardens. 3) Oil Fate Unknown because we no oil properties have been reported. However the onscene reports of not having enough oil to skim or absorb would indicate that there isn't enough oil to persist for long distances or times. [SEP] There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. NOAA's support role was limited to remote trajectory support.
T/B PENN 400 WAS IN THE PROCESS OF TRANSFERRING ASPHALT TO SPRAGUE EVERETT TANKS VIA EXXON MOBIL MTA.  TRANSFER SECURED UPON SHEEN DISCOVERY PENDING FURTHER INVESTIGATION. UPON FURTHER INVESTIGATION, A CRACK WAS DISCOVERED IN A #6 OIL LINE (FROM EXXONMOBIL) WITH PRODUCT LEAKING OUT AT RATE OF APPROXIMATELY 30 - 50 GALLONS/HOUR. [SEP] Courtesy of Dr. Jim Clark, ExxonMobil [SEP] Courtesy of Ted Bazenas, USEPA This section has been flushed heavily and has had several treatments of Corexit 9580. Oil remains beneath the rip-rap and continues to sheen. [SEP] Photos 14 June [SEP] Gull catching and eating a crab [SEP] Vegetation [SEP] 27June A [SEP] Due to the complexity involved in cleaning this area (old, burned pilings - some safety considerations) cleaning has not begun. Plans are being considered. The oiling is not heavy here. [SEP] Vegetation [SEP] Subsurface Oil & Sheen [SEP] Locus Map [SEP] 27 June Survey B [SEP] Situation Update 27 June 2006 After some frustration on the part of state and federal organizations regarding the progress being made by Exxon/ Mobil on cleanup, this week the company has engaged corporate support in the form of the EM Response Group, including Dr. Jim Clark. Action items for this team include -a better assessment of the impact area -a formal cleanup plan -better communications with SOSC and FOSC Surveys On 22 June, EM arranged for a survey of the impacted sites with the stated goal of signing off many of the locations. Unfortunately, the survey was by boat and direct shoreline access was difficult due to draft in most locations. In the one location where the team could access the shoreline, the oiling was heavier than first thought. Oil had penetrated the riprap to 12 inches and cleanup efforts had been less effective than hoped. The result of the survey was agreement that one, lightly oiled site would be signed off due to safety considerations, but the other required a future foot survey. On 27 June, a foot survey was conducted of the heaviest impacted areas. The survey included FOSC, NOAA and RP (SOSC was unavailable, but briefed with photos later in the day). Among the discoveries, oil is subsurface at several locations (see photos) and heavy under riprap in others. While the geographic extent is not great, access and working conditions are difficult. Fortunately, most of the impact area is on man-made materials (urban/industrial conditions, degraded environment) and there is virtually no access available to the public. Future Actions: EM has requested the use of Corexit 9580, an NCP listed shoreline cleaning agent. The NOAA SSC is coordinating the concurrence network of the RRT for judgment on the plan. The area covered by the plan is less than 10,000 square feet. EM proposes to apply the chemical, low pressure/high volume flush and recover with skimmers and sorbents. Steve Lehmann NOAA SSC On-scene
On May 17, 2006, the bulk carrier MV Spar Orion ran aground near Port Everglades, FL. The cargo is unknown at this time. The vessel is reported to have 480 MT of a heavy fuel oil. The incident occurred at approximately 0630 hours EST. The vessel is reported to be aground on a reef one mile off shore of Port Everglades, FL. The vessels location is 026-07.35N and 080-05.22W. The location of this grounding is similar to that of the FEDERAL PESCADORIS , a cement carrier, grounded around 2004 at the Western edge of the ancorage. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Bulk Carrier Spar Orion Grounding, Port Everglades, Florida I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 1200 EDT on 17 May 2006. Information in this report is based on the assumption that the bulk carrier Spar Orion is aground on a reef one mile offshore of Port Everglades (26&#8734; 06.7' N, 80&#8734; 05.5' W). The vessel is reported to contain 480 MT of a heavy fuel oil. No releases have been reported at this time. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers an area approximately 2 miles north and 10 miles south of the reported grounding site. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations or oil impact. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material Heavy fuel oil may coat shorelines and biological resources using the shoreline or water surface. Due to relatively low concentrations of water soluble and acutely toxic compounds, impacts to water column resources are likely to be small. Heavy fuel oil is highly adhesive, making it difficult to clean up. It forms thick slicks that eventually break up into tarballs that are very persistent, posing significant risks to waterbirds and shorelines. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The outer coast shoreline in the area is primarily composed of coarse-grained sand beaches. There are a few areas of mixed sand and gravel beach to the south of the grounding site, and some riprap along inlets. The shoreline at Port Everglades (approximately 1 mile west of the reported grounding location) is predominantly sheltered, solid, man-made structures, with some riprap, mixed sand and gravel beaches, and sheltered marshes and/or mangroves approximately a mile south of the inlet. The most sensitive habitats in the area are marshes and mangroves. The heavy oil will readily adhere to and coat wetland vegetation. Heavily coated vegetation could experience sub-lethal effects, including die-back of the aboveground vegetation. In some cases the vegetation could experience lethal impacts, especially if oil becomes mixed into the sediments and root zone. Where wetland sediments are muddy and soft, it is important to prevent excessive disturbance and further mixing of oil into the substrate by foot traffic during cleanup activities, as this could result in more severe and long-term impacts to the marshes. On sheltered, solid man-made structures, heavy fuel oil may form bands or "bath-tub" rings at the water line. Heavy oils tend to form a thick band or "bath-tub" ring at the high water line on these solid structures. On riprap, oil may penetrate into the cavities between the boulders and adhere to the rough boulder surfaces, making it difficult to remove. Chronic sheening problems are possible, especially in sheltered areas. On beaches, the heavy fuel oil may form thick accumulations at the high-tide line. For coarse-grained sand and gravel beaches, oil penetration into the sediment may be up to 25 cm, and burial may be up to depths of 20 cm. If oil does strand on the beaches, it will be important to track the sediment erosion/deposition patterns as the winds change. There can be rapid burial of the oiled layer, making cleanup more difficult. Care should be taken not to mix oil deeper into the sediments through physical activity during cleanup. Direct oiling or concentrations of oil in nearshore waters may affect organisms on the beaches. V. Biological Resources at Risk Birds Least tern (state threatened) may be nesting within a half mile of the inlet and along the beach further south. Wilson's plover may be nesting 3 miles south of the inlet. Diving birds and wading birds may be nesting more inland near North Miami Beach. Migratory and resident shorebirds may be present in high numbers (over 1000 birds) along sand beaches and inside the Port Everglades inlet. Brown pelicans and double-crested cormorants may present in high concentrations in the area. Diving birds may be severely impacted from an oil spill because of the length of time they spend on the water's surface. Oil can adhere to the feathers reducing insulation, water buoyancy, and water repellency. These symptoms can quickly lead to death from hypothermia and/or drowning. Preening of oiled feathers can cause sickness or death in birds due to ingested oil. Fish and Invertebrates Numerous fish and invertebrates are potentially present in the area, including: bay scallop, American oyster, hard clam, pink shrimp (spawning), blue crab (spawning), spiny lobster (spawning), stone crab, gray snapper, pinfish, spotted seatrout, spot, Spanish mackerel, and gulf flounder. Heavy oils do not pose a large, direct impact to water-column resources because they have a low water-soluble fraction. The larval and juvenile stages are at a greater risk from oil spills because of the shallow water habitats they occupy and their sensitivity to the toxic compounds. Reptiles Green sea turtles (state/federally endangered), hawksbill sea turtles (state/federally endangered), leatherback sea turtles (state/federally endangered), and loggerhead sea turtles (state/federally threatened) may be present along sand beaches and in nearshore waters. All species are likely present in low concentrations, excluding loggerheads that may be present in moderate concentrations. Green, leatherback, and loggerhead sea turtles may be nesting (hawksbill begin nesting in June) and hatchlings may be present. Oil on the shoreline can coat the adult turtles as they come out of the water to nest, and may be transferred to the eggs. Research shows that the eggs have low survival rate and increased deformities when oiled. Also, bands of oil can coat the hatchlings as they travel to the ocean. Direct effects of oil exposure on adult turtles may include: oiling of sensory organs, reddening and sloughing off of the skin, dysfunction of the salt gland, uptake of oil in the gastrointestinal system, and disturbed diving and respiration patterns. Sea turtles may ingest tarballs resulting in sickness or death. Floating tarballs can coat the flippers, and the mouth can become coated as the turtle attempts to clean its flippers. Large quantities of tar have been known to immobilize smaller turtles. Low concentrations of crocodiles (state/federally endangered) may be present in wetlands. Marine Mammals Manatees (state/federally endangered) may be present in high concentrations in nearshore areas. Oil may cause irritation of skin and mucous membrane surfaces. Inhaling vapors may cause irritation of the lungs. Injuries to these animals are possible if increased small boat traffic occurs during the response effort. VI. Human-Use Resources at Risk Recreational beaches are heavily used in this area. This area is also used for recreational diving, particularly north of the reported grounding site. There are several marinas, boat ramps, the John U. Lloyd State Recreation Area, and the Hugh Taylor Birch State Recreation Area in the vicinity. There are several historical sites in the area. Port Everglades is an important commercial port, and both commercial and recreational vessel traffic in the area is likely. [SEP] At 0100 this morning 18 May 2006, the MV Spar Orion was refloated off the reef under her own power. She will stay in the anchorage area until a berth is available and will transit into Port Everglades at that time. As far as the reef damage assessment, the NOAA SSC provided the name and contact information of the NOAA DAC representative. A detailed response situation was provided to the NOAA DAC representative by CG Sector Miami to insure that appropriate NRDA staff are connected and involved with Florida State & Local stakeholders in order to make this assessment. [SEP] Date; May 17, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Gary Ott FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded vessel Spar Orion FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The bulk carrier Spar Orion is grounded north of the entrance to Port Everglades at 026deg 7.35'N by 080deg 5.22'W. This about 1 mile offshore. The vessel is reported to be on a reef and has 480 metric tons of heavy fuel. This is about 132,00 gallons. The type of oil is not known at this time. There is no spill. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds are expected to be 10 -15 knots from the N to NNE today and tomorrow. By Friday and thru the weekend winds are expected to be 5-10 knots and variable in direction. 2) Trajectory Analysis Should oil
USCG contacted NOAA HAZMAT for a drift analysis for a derelict barge of unknown origin or ownership that has been floating around in Gulf of Alaska for the past couple of months.  The barge was first noted approximately 200 miles south of Adak in the Central Aleutians on May 4, 2006.  The vessel was recently sighted on Sept. 9 at 57-19.7N, 142-59.1W, approximately 200 miles south of Cape St. Elias in the Eastern Gulf of Alaska.  By Sept 20 the barge had turned north and then westward in its drift and was approximately 50 NM south of Resurrection Bay on the south coast of the Kenai Peninsula. Coast Guard  Sector Anchorage has been developing plans to salvage/tow the barge to safe port before it comes aground somewhere in southern Alaska. [SEP] Photo from USCG Cutter Maple [SEP] DRIFTING ABANDONED BARGE, 200NM SOUTH OF ADAK IS, AK 1130 ADT, Thursday September 14, 2006 Sunset (9/14): 2024 Sunrise (9/15): 0724 Sunset (9/15): 2021 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the S to SE at 25-35 knots. Friday, the winds are predicted to be from the S to SE at 35-40 knots. _____________________________________ Seas: Today through Friday, seas are predicted to be 12-15 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Friday, rain is expected in the region. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the S to SE 40-45 knots. Seas, 14-16 feet. Cloudy skies with rain expected. Sunday, the winds are forecast to be from the S to SE 30-35 knots. Seas, 14-16 feet. Cloudy skies with rain expected. [SEP] The location of the barge at 1042 LT, Sept. 20, was 59-11.604'N, 149-54.480'W. [SEP] Photo of unmanned, derelict barge in GOA [SEP] Search Area Forecast May 8, 2006 [SEP] Search Area Forecast May 6, 2006 [SEP] Back in May, 2006, the Alaskan Coast Guard was notified of an unmanned barge adrift 200 nautical miles south of Adak Island, and requested that NOAA perform some trajectory forecasts, which are recorded earlier in this incident. The barge has now drifted into the eastern Gulf of Alaska, and the Coast Guard has renewed their interest in it since it is now in the TAPS tanker flight cruising path. A CG C130 located it on Sept 8,9 and 14, and those positions are shown on the accompanying attachment. The content and the owner of the barge are still unknown. As a result, the CGC Maple arrived on-scene to attach lights to the barge as well as attempt to better identify it and possibly determine its contents. The CG will continue to monitor the situation and the position of the barge, and has put NOAA on notice of the incident for possible assistance in the coming days. The CGC Maple has been requested to provide on-scene weather reports. [SEP] Search Area Forecast May 7, 2006 [SEP] John Whitney reports that the USCG successfully towed the barge to Kodiak
Overflight reported a 1 mile diameter area of dark oil about 1 mile off shore.This just off Belle Pass, La. [SEP] There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. NOAA's support role was limited to remote trajectory support. [SEP] MYSTERY SPILL, BELL PASS, LA 1600 (CST), Wednesday, May 03, 2006 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (5/03): 1838 Sunrise (5/04): 0518 Sunset (5/04): 1839 36 Hour Forecast ------------------------------------------------- Winds: Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the S-SE at 5-10 knots. Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the S at 5-10 knots becoming S-SW at 10-15 knots in the afternoon. Thursday, evening, the winds are predicted to be from the S-SW at 10-15 knots. Waves: Today through Thursday, seas are forecast to be 1-2 feet. Precipitation: Today through Thursday, no precipitation is forecast in the region. Temperatures: Today: highs mid to upper 80's. Tonight: lows in the upper 60's Thursday: highs in the mid to upper 80's and lows in the mid to upper 60's. Extended Forecast: ------------------------------------------------- Friday: Winds from the S-SW at 5-10 knots becoming SW at 10-15 knots in the late afternoon. Seas 2-3 feet. Chance of afternoon showers and thunderstorms is forecast. Saturday: Winds from the SE at 10-15 knots. Seas 2-4 feet. Chance of afternoon showers and thunderstorms is forecast. Sunday: winds from the W to SW at 15-20 knots. Seas 2-4 feet. Chance of afternoon showers and thunderstorms is forecast. [SEP] Date: 1715 CDT May 3, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Willie Whitmore  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Mystery Spill, Offshore Belle Pass FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the issue of evaporation from mystery slick discovered this morning. These notes are based on the following information: An overflight this morning, May 3, 2006, located a mystery slick at 1144 CDT composed of 1nm x 1nm dark brown sheen located at 29 deg 03' 13" N, 090 deg 15' 29" W. This postion is approx. 2 nm southwest of Belle Pass and 1 nm offshore the eastern end of Timbalier Island. No confirmed release or amount are available at this time. U.S.C.G estimates the volume as 1300 gallons. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds today through Thursday afternoon are expected to be from the SSE at 5-10 knots. Thursday evening through Friday the winds are forecast to be from the. SSW 10-15 knots 2)Trajectory The slick is close to shore with light onshore winds. We expect that it could reach the shoreline of Timbalier Island later today or overnight.
Auto Carrier fully loaded adrift without power off Florida Keys [SEP] Date; May 1, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: M/V Crowley Ambassador FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A car carrying vessel, the M/V Ambassador has been adrift since 0900 EDT. It is 510' and fully loaded. Reported positions with times: 1615 EDT 25deg 24.146' N by 080deg 03.218' W 1647 EDT 25deg 23.143' N by 080deg 04.240' W 1722 EDT 25deg 23.500' N by 080deg 04.210' W These locations are about 7.5 nm from the outer barrier island off Biscayne Bay. Between 1615 and 1647 the vessel moved to the SSE about 1 nm. Between 1647 and 1722 the vessel moved to the N about 0.4 nm. Onscene conditions are seas 4 - 6 feet and winds from 030deg True at 17 knots A tug is expected to reach the vessel in about 3 hours. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds are expected to be from the NE at 15-20 knots into the evening. 2) Ship Drift Analysis The vessel is located along the western boundary of the Gulf Stream. HF Radar measured currents in the area from the Univ. of Miami site, http://iwave.rsmas.miami.edu/wera/ indicates that currents are moving to the north between 1 and 1.5 knots. Car carrying vessels typically sit high in the water and have a significant amount of downwind sail effect. Typical 'windage' is about 5-10% of the wind speed. It appears that the wind, blowing the vessel to the south and the currents pushing the vessel to the north are almost at a standoff. Small variations in the winds, currents, or vessel orientation will result in the vessel moving either to the north or to the south over short periods of time. We do not think that the vessel will move significantly in either direction over the next few hours. Whatever movement there is will be primarily in the north - south direction. Therefore we do not expect the vessel to ground before the tug arrives onscene. [SEP] File Photo of Crowley Ambassador [SEP] M/V CROWLEY AMBASSADOR ADRIFT, BISCAYNE BAY, FL 1730 (EST), Monday, May 01, 2006 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (5/01): 1851 Sunrise (5/02): 0544 Sunset (5/02): 1852 36 Hour Forecast ------------------------------------------------- Winds: Monday night: N-NE 15 -20 knots. Tuesday morning: NE 10 -15 knots. Tuesday afternoon: NE 5-10 knots. Tuesday night: NE 5-10 knots. Waves: Today through Tuesday, seas of 4-6 feet are forecast. Precipitation: Today through Tuesday, no precipitation is forecast. Temperatures: Today: highs mid 80's. Tonight: lows in the upper 60's Tuesday: highs in the mid 80's and lows in the mid to upper 60's. Extended Forecast: ------------------------------------------------- Wednesday: Winds from the NE at 5-10 knots becoming SE at 5-10 knots in the late afternoon. Seas 2-3 feet. No precipitation is forecast Thursday: Winds from the NW at 5-10 knots becoming E at 5-10 knots in the late afternoon. Seas 2-4 feet. No precipitation is forecast. Friday: winds from the E-SE at 10-15 knots. Seas 2-4 feet. No precipitation is forecast. [SEP] Crowley Ambassador Final Report 2 May 2006 Situation USCG reported that a tug arrived on scene and took the vessel under tow at approximately 2000 local last night. Case is closed without pollution or grounding incident.
Hygrade 42 Barge, St Croix, USVIFriday, April 28 2006Hovensa Barge Hygrade 42 with tug Grape Tree Bay went aground North of Providence Cay in the WOPA channel.  Product Onboard is 15000 Bbls of diesel fuel. [SEP] Tidal Heights at Christiansted, St. Croix Island }, St. Croix Island, Lesser Antilles & Virgin Islands, WEST INDIES Station No. 4607 Latitude: 17deg 45.00' N Longitude: 64deg 42.00' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -02:43 Low Water +01:06 High water height difference: (*1.07+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.00+0.0) Based on LIME TREE BAY (calculated from constituent data) From Fri Apr 28, 2006 to Sun May 07, 2006 (10 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Fri Apr 28, 2006; 08:23 pm; 0.8ft Lowest Tide - Sun Apr 30, 2006; 02:56 pm; -0.4ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 04/28/2006 13:39 -0.3 Low Fri 20:23 +0.8 High ------------------------------------------------------- 04/29/2006 14:16 -0.4 Low Sat 21:18 +0.8 High ------------------------------------------------------- 04/30/2006 14:56 -0.4 Low Sun 22:18 +0.7 High ------------------------------------------------------- 05/01/2006 15:38 -0.4 Low Mon 23:20 +0.7 High ------------------------------------------------------- 05/02/2006 16:20 -0.3 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 05/03/2006 00:18 +0.7 High Wed 17:01 -0.3 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 05/04/2006 01:05 +0.6 High Thu 17:38 -0.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 05/05/2006 01:32 +0.6 High Fri 18:07 -0.0 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 05/06/2006 01:35 +0.6 High Sat 18:15 +0.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 05/07/2006 01:11 +0.5 High Sun 15:04 +0.2 Low [SEP] BARGE HYGRADE 42 GROUNDING, ST. CROIX, USVI 1230 (AST), Friday, April 28, 2006 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (4/28): 1839 Sunrise (4/29): 0554 Sunset (4/29): 1838 36 Hour Forecast ------------------------------------------------- Winds: Friday afternoon: E-SE 10 -15 knots, sea breeze may develop in the afternoon bringing a N wind at 5-10 knots. Friday night: E-SE 5 -10 knots. Saturday morning: E 5 -10 knots. Saturday afternoon: E 5-10 knots. Saturday night: E-SE 10-15 knots. Waves: Today through Saturday, combined seas of 2-4 feet are forecast. Precipitation: Today through Tonight, scattered showers and thunderstorms are forecast in the region. Saturday, showers and thunderstorms possibly heavy at times are expected in the region. Temperatures: Today: highs mid 80's Tonight: lows in the mid 70's Saturday: highs in the mid 80's and lows in the mid 70's. Extended Forecast: ------------------------------------------------- Sunday: Winds from the S to SE at 5-10 knots. Seas 3-6 feet. Scattered showers and thundershowers. Monday: Winds from the E at 5-10 knots. Seas 2-4 feet. Isolated afternoon showers. Tuesday: winds from the E-SE at 10-15 knots. Seas 2-4 feet. [SEP] Date:1330 AST April 27, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Grounded Barge Hygrade 42 FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ These notes are based on the following information: A barge with 15,000 bbls of diesel has grounded on the northern shore of St Croix near Providence Key. The reported location is 17deg 45.16' N by 064deg 42.36' W. There is no reported oil in the water at the present time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds are forecast to be from the ESE at 10 -15 knots with the possiblity of a sea breeze developing this afternoon which could result in N winds at 5- 10 knots. Tonight winds are expected to be from the ESE 1t 5-10 knots. 2) Trajectory We would expect that the movement of any spilled oil to be dominated by the winds because of the small tidal fluctuations( about 1 foot over 12 hours). If oil was to spill under the the ESE wind conditions, Long Reef would be threatened within 1-2 hours. If oil was to spill under sea breeze conditions with winds from the North, the shoreline of Christenstead could be impacted within 1 hour of the spill. The extent of shoreline oiling would depend upon how much oil was lost and over what period of time it was lost. If a significant amount of the diesel was lost over a short period of time, shoreline oiling could go on for 2-3 days and impact several miles of shoreline. 3)Estimated Oil Fate Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 mph Wave Height = computed from winds  Water Temperature = 80 deg F Time of Initial Release = April 28, 0900 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 15,000 bbl ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill bbl percent percent percent  1 15,000 - 1 - 0 - 99  2 15,000 2 0 98  4 15,000 - 4 - 0 - 95  6 15,000 8 1 91  8 15,000 - 11 - 2 - 87  10 15,000 15 4 82  12 15,000 - 18 - 6 - 76  14 15,000 21 9 70  16 15,000 - 24 - 12 - 64  18 15,000 26 16 58  20 15,000 - 28 - 19 - 52  22 15,000 30 23 47  24 15,000 - 32 - 26 - 42  26 15,000 33 29 38  28 15,000 - 35 - 32 - 33  30 15,000 36 35 30  32 15,000 - 37 - 37 - 26  34 15,000 37 39 23  36 15,000 - 38 - 41 - 21  38 15,000 39 43 18  40 15,000 - 39 - 45 - 16  42 15,000 39 46 14  44 15,000 - 40 - 48 - 13  46 15,000 40 49 11  48 15,000 - 40 - 50 - 10
Double bottom Tank Vessel Maragara is hard aground outside Guayanilla Port with over 308000 Bbls of #6 fuel oil on board. [SEP] File photo of vessel [SEP] Around 1AM the Columbian tanker Margarra ran aground on Media Luna Reef south of CORCO on the south coast of PR. Its carrying around 300,000 bbls of #6. This is the second vessel in less than a year that has run aground approaching CORCO. USCG is looking at it, they are going to wait for the next high tide to see if the vessel will float off by itself. That's all I have from the local radio report that I heard driving in this morning. Don't know if there will be any meetings with USCG in CORCO yet. Felix Lopez USFWS [SEP] Latest from MISLE: Message Text: FM//THE ATTEMPT TO MOVE VESSEL WITH TIDE WAS NEGRES. THE VESSLE IS HARD AGROUND. THE REPORTS FM THE PILOT IS THAT THE VESSEL IS HARD AGROUND IN THE FORWARD STARBOARD PORTION OF THE VESSEL. SURVEYERS ARE BEING ASSEMBLED TO COMMENCE SALVAGE PLAN. THIS IS TO INCLUDE SOUNDINGS, MEASUREMENTS, ETC TO SEE WHAT WOULD WORK TO LIGHTEN THE VESSEL. PREPS MAY BE DONE IN THE AM, HOWEVER LIGHTING OPS WILL NOT COMMENCE UNTIL PM ON THE 28. WE STILL HAVE NO VISIBLE POLLUTION OR ANY ODORS THAT WOULD INDICATE A BREACH ON THE HULL. [SEP] area map [SEP] Date: 0615 AST April 27, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Grounded T/V Margara FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ These notes are based on the following information: The T/V Margara is hard aground off the south shore of Puerto Rico at approximately 17deg 57' N by 066deg 43.6' W. This is outside of Tallaboa Bay and SE of the entrance to Guayanilla Bay. The double bottom vessel has 308,809 bbls of #6 oil onboard. There is no reported oil in the water at the present time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds are forecast to be from the E at 10-15 knots this morning, becoming ESE 10-15 knots by mid morning. Tonight and tomorrow, winds are expected to be from the SE to S at 10-15 knots. Seas will be 1-3 feet. 2) Trajectory Any oil spilled today or tomorrow would impact the shoreline to the N and NW of the grounded vessel. Cayo Maria Langa Island could be impacted within 2-3 hours of a spill, Guayanilla Bay and the shoreline to Punta Vaquero could be impacted within 12 hours, depending upon when the spill occurred. Over the course of several days, oil could move to the west and impact Guanica Bay. 3)Estimated Oil Fate Oil Name = FUEL OIL NO.6 API = 12.3 Pour Point = 59 deg F  Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = computed from winds  Water Temperature = 80 deg F Time of Initial Release = April 27, 0200 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 100,000 bbl ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill bbl percent percent percent  1 100,000 - 0 - 0 - 100  2 100,000 0 0 100  4 100,000 - 1 - 0 - 99  6 100,000 1 0 98  8 100,000 - 2 - 0 - 98  10 100,000 2 1 97  12 100,000 - 3 - 1 - 96  18 100,000 4 3 94  24 100,000 - 5 - 5 - 90  30 100,000 5 8 87  36 100,000 - 6 - 10 - 84  42 100,000 6 13 81  48 100,000 - 6 - 15 - 78  54 100,000 7 17 76  60 100,000 - 7 - 19 - 74  66 100,000 7 21 72  72 100,000 - 7 - 23 - 70  78 100,000 7 24 68  84 100,000 - 7 - 26 - 67  90 100,000 8 27 65  96 100,000 - 8 - 28 - 64  102 100,000 8 30 63  108 100,000 - 8 - 31 - 62  114 100,000 8 32 60  120 100,000 - 8 - 33 - 59 [SEP] Margara Salvage, Puerto Rico [SEP] Puerto Rico Benthic Zones [SEP] Area Contingency Map of Response area [SEP] Oil tanker runs aground in Puerto Rico By JASMINE KRIPALANI jkripalani@miamiherald.com A 748-foot tank containing hundreds of thousands of barrels of crude oil ran aground this morning while traveling from Colombia to Puerto Rico, according to the Coast Guard. Coast Guard investigators stationed in San Juan are looking for any signs of oil leakage, Coast Guard Petty Officer Dana Warr said. ''There are no signs of pollution, and [the team is] scheduling aircraft flight over the area,'' Warr said. The tanker -- known as the Margara -- ran aground at 1:15 a.m. It originated from Cartagena, Colombia. It was a few miles away from its destination, Tallaboa, Puerto Rico, when it ran into trouble. Investigators must first determine if there's an oil leak. If one isn't found, then they can remove the ship ''without creating any damage to the ship or creating a spill by actually moving the ship off the ground,'' Warr said. Its 28 crew members appear to be safe. [SEP] Weather Forecast for T/V Margara Grounding 0600 (AST), Thursday, April 28, 2006 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunrise (4/28): 6:02 a.m. AST Sunset (4/28): 6:46 p.m. Sunrise (4/29): 6:01 a.m. Sunset (4/29): 6:47 p.m. 36 Hour Forecast ------------------------------------------------- Winds: Thursday morning: E winds 10-15 knots becoming ESE, 10-15 knots by 10 AM Thursday afternoon: ESE 10 -15 knots Thursday night: SE 10 -15 knots Friday morning: SE 10 -15 knots Friday afternoon: S 10 knots Waves: Combined seas 1-3 feet Thursday and Friday Precipitation: No precipitation is forecast for the region Thursday or Friday Temperatures: Today: highs low 90's Tonight: lows in the mid 70's Extended Forecast: ------------------------------------------------- Saturday: Winds from the S to SE at 10 knots. Seas 1-3 feet. Scattered thundershowers possible. Sunday: Winds from the S to SE at 10 knots. Seas 1-3 feet. [SEP] T/V MARGARA GROUNDING, PUERTO RICO 1330 (AST), Thursday, April 27, 2006 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (4/27): 1846 Sunrise (4/28): 0601 Sunset (4/28): 1847 36 Hour Forecast ------------------------------------------------- Winds: Thursday afternoon: ESE 10 -15 knots Thursday night: ESE 10 -15 knots Friday morning: ESE 8 -13 knots Friday afternoon: ESE 8-13 knots Friday night: ESE 8-13 knots Waves: Today through Friday, combined seas of 3-4 feet are forecast. Precipitation: Today through Friday, isolated afternoon showers are forecast in the region. Temperatures: Today: highs low 90's Tonight: lows in the mid 70's Friday: highs in the low 90's and lows in the mid 70's. Extended Forecast: ------------------------------------------------- Saturday: Winds from the E at 5-10 knots. Seas 2-3 feet. Scattered showers and thundershowers. Sunday: Winds from the NE at 10-15 knots. Seas 2-4 feet. Isolated afternoon showers. Monday: winds from the E-NE at 10-15 knots. Seas 2-6 feet. [SEP] Margara Salvage, Puerto Rico
Silver sheen with brown and rainbow.Oil on the beach near Fourchon. [SEP] Mystery Sheen off Pass Fourchon 1530 CST, MOnday, April 24, 2006 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (4/24): 19:32 Sunrise (4/25): 06:25 Sunset (4/25): 19:33 36 Hour Forecast Winds and Precipitation: --------------------------------------------------- This afternoon: Southeast winds 5 to 10 knots, shifting to the south at about 1400. Seas 1 to 2 feet. Protected waters smooth to a light chop. Tonight: South winds 10 to 15 knots. Seas 2 to 4 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Tuesday: Southwest winds around 10 knots easing to 5 to 10 knots late in the afternoon. Seas 1 to 3 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Tuesday night: Southwest winds 5 to 10 knots becoming southwest 10 to 15 knots after midnight. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Wednesday: Southwest winds 10 to 15 knots becoming north by afternoon. Seas 2 to 4 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Wednesday night: North winds 10 to 15 knots. Seas 3 to 4 feet. protected waters a light chop. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Waves: ---------------------------------------- This afternoon: Seas 1 to 2 feet. Protected waters smooth to a light chop. Tonight: Seas 2 to 4 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Tuesday: Seas 1 to 3 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Tuesday night: Seas 2 to 3 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Wednesday: Seas 2 to 4 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Wednesday night: Seas 3 to 4 feet. Protected waters a light chop. Extended Forecast [SEP] There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. NOAA's support role was limited to remote trajectory support.
Mystery sheen observed by USCG approximately 10 miles offshore SE Louisiana in Block 33.  Silver sheen approximately 5 miles by 2.5 miles.  Source unknown. [SEP] Trajectory for Apr. 21 @ 1800hr [SEP] Trajectory for Apr. 21 @ 0700hr [SEP] The morning of April 21, the USCG MSO Morgan City contacted the NOAA Scientific Support team regarding two different mystery sheens off shore shores of Grand Isle, La. Exact amount spilled was unknown. One sheen was over 40 miles offshore and HAZMAT concluded it posed no threat of shoring with the future weather reports. An RP for the first sheen far offshore was eventually identfied. HAZMAT ran a trajectory for the second sheen with updated information from a USCG overflight and provided the trajectory information to Morgan City. It was predicted that the second light silver sheen, located approximately 7 miles offshore, would impact land if enough oil remained in the sheen.. NO other requests have been made by the USCG for the NOAA team. The NOAA SSC forwarded the trajectory information to LADEQ. [SEP] Trajectory for Apr. 21 @ 2000hr
An F-16 jet crashed into the Atlantic Ocean, 35 miles SE of Myrtle Beach SC.Fuel on board was (worst case 5000 gal) JP8. Position 33-18.2N,  078-24.5W [SEP] Initial and Final Report 05 April 2006 Jet Crash Off Myrtle Beach, SC Situation USCG called the NOAA SSC April 5th just after 9PM EDST to report an F16 jet crash 35 miles SE of Myrtle Beach SC. Position33-18.2n; 078-24.5w fuel on board was (wost case 5000 gal) JP8 NOAA provided Adios Oil Fate model and discussed oil fate and trajectory for the spill with the officer on duty. no further action was requested.
F/V Blue North, 166 ft steel hull catcher processor, is disabled and adrift approximately 25 nm west of Unalaska Island. The vessel's single screw is fouled with unknown amount of line. The vessel has approximately 33,000 gallons of diesel, 500 gallons of lube oil and 11 people on board. The approximate location of the vessel as of 31 MAR at 0600 Alaska local time was 53 deg 37.88N, 167 deg 50.31W. [SEP] The M/V James Dunlap, a 4000 hp tug dispatched from Dutch Harbor was able to intersect the Blue North 6 n.m. from the Unalaska coastline, attach a towing line, and tow it to Dutch Harbor and safety. Once there the vessel was taken to Magone Marine Services for repairs. Case closed.
The Empress of the North, a 360-foot cruise ship operated by the American West Steamboat Co., ran aground on the Columbia River near Washougal, Washington on Friday, March 24 at 10:10 a.m.  All passengers and crew were safely transferrred off the vessel onto the passenger vessel Queen of the West and a barge early Friday evening.  On Saturday, March 25 approximately 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel were removed from the vessel in preparation for re-floating.  The NOAA SSC assisted at the USCG Sector Portland Command Post.  NOAA ORR provided information on likely oil fate, persistence, and movement in the event of a diesel release from the vessel. [SEP] After an unsuccessful attempt to refloat the vessel the evening of March 25, the vessel was successfully re-floated the afternoon of Sunday, March 26 and is now at a dry-dock facility on Swan Island in Portland, Oregon.
A sheen of unknown origin was reported at 6:30 a.m. in Elliot Bay near Terminals 70, 46, and 91 by a vessel transitting the area.  A USCG overflight at approximately 9:00 a.m. has observed silver and rainbow sheen in the Bay.  A potential storm drain source near Terminal 18 (end of SW Landers Road) is being investigated. [SEP] Trajectory 3/17/06 1830 [SEP] Sheen reported in Seattle's Elliott Bay Full story: http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/localnews/2002871824_websheen17.html By Seattle Times staff SEATTLE - About 15 gallons of oil spread over one square mile of Seattle's Elliott Bay today, most likely from a source on or near Harbor Island, the Coast Guard said. Petty Officer Kurt Fredrickson said the oil was too thinly spread to be removed by absorbent pads, but booms were placed around an area on the west side of Harbor Island after investigators found a heavier concentration of the spilled substance in this contaminated area. The source of the pollution had not been determined. Harbor Island is an industrial area on the south side of Elliott Bay. "It looks a lot worse than it is because it spread out," Fredrickson said, explaining that one quart of oil could spread out to cover the area of two football fields. Fredrickson called the leaked substance a "weathered oil product," and said it was heavier than diesel. He said it would take the Department of Ecology a few days to determine the petroleum product's exact makeup. The sheen was spotted by a tug boat on the north side of the bay and reported to the Coast Guard at 7:10 a.m., Coast Guard Petty Officer Jeff Pollinger said. It also was reported by four planes that flew over the bay on a landing approach to Boeing Field. The sheen spread between Smith Cove and Pier 70, said Ecology Department spokesman Larry Altose. "Hopefully we got it soon enough to get it stopped," Altose said. The Coast Guard sent a 41-foot boat and a helicopter to try to identify the cause, and others patrolled the shore on foot. Ecology also chartered a helicopter to fly over the area so investigators could get a better look at the sheen, Altose said. There was no sign of damage to wildlife from the sheen, Pollinger said, nor did it appear to have reached the shore. [SEP] Trajectory 3/17/06 1230
This is a general folder to capture information and products related to NOAA HAZMAT support to USCG for vessel removal in Louisiana [SEP] PDF map showing the original vessel cases that were deemed to be Mission Applicable under ESF-Other. Mission Applicable under this function has been defined as "the clearing of waterways that are tidally influenced and support a sustained commercial function." From Jim Morris [SEP] Photo taken 05 Jan 06 (NOAA). [SEP] Situation Update for ESF-Other / 12 March 2006 [SEP] USCG wreck and salvage project is now 93% complete. At the current pace of vessel removals, USCG expects to be complete by mid-June. The command post is shifting effort to debris removal in navigable waterways. [SEP] Photo taken 05 Jan 06 (NOAA). [SEP] This shrimp boat topped a levee and stranded in this St. Bernard's neighborhood. This vessel will not be salvaged by the USCG as it is not "Mission Applicable". Photo taken 3/4/06 (NOAA). [SEP] Helton Photo: Yard near Empire for storage of recovered vessels. Some owners have recovered their vessels and are working to get them back in the water. [SEP] Series of images over past week showing private salvage of a natural gas barge off a levy on the Intracoastal waterway. The salvors built a series of temporary earthen locks and moved the barge several hundred yards to the river. [SEP] Helton photo. Ruptured paint cans at the foundation of the hardware store. [SEP] The vessel and wreck removal project is nearing completion but the USCG recently added this case. The vessel owner has not taken action so the USCG is proceeding with developing a salvage plan. [SEP] Pogey Boats on Hwy. 23 [SEP] Wrecked shrimp boat found on a pipeline right-of-way in Lake Lery in Lower St. Bernard Parish. The vessel is outside of the navigation channel and not on the target list of vessels to be removed. The USCG has notified the pipeline owner.
Chemical barge allided with Lock & Dam 52 on the Ohio river near Brookport, IL.  Chemical of concern is cumene (isopropylbenzene).  No release reported at this time. [SEP] TIME: Wednesday, February 28, 2007 2:00pm CST TO: NOAA SSC Elizabeth Jones FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at the trajectory implications of a spill of Cumene from a barge on the Ohio River at Lock and Dam 52, near Brookport, Illinois. These notes are based on the following information: A barge had an accident near Lock and Damn 52. It is currently tied up at the lock wall. It has been reported that about 3700 gallons of Cumene may have spilled into the void space of the barge. It is unknown if any product has been released into the river. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) River Flow: The river is currently flowing fairly high. The locks are currently open. There is a moderate amount of sediment in the river at this time. Flow is estimated today by the NOAA River Forecast Center at 415,000 cfs. The flow is expected to increase moderately throughout the week. The mean velocity at the spill location is estimated to be about 2.6 to 2.7 mph. 2) TRAJECTORY: Any product that gets in the water will tend to move downstream and mix with the river water. As the product mixes, the maximum concentration will go down at it moves downstream. Given the estimated flow velocity, any product in the river will reach the junction of the Missouri River about 40 miles away approximately 15-20 hours after the release. We have run NOAA's river dilution calculator to provide estimates of the maximum concentration likely to be observed as any contaminant spilled moves downstream. This calculation assumes that 3700 gallons of product is spilled all at once, and that all of that product dissolves in the river. It is likely that less than all the product will dissolve. In addition, some of the product is likely to adsorb to the sediment in the river, which has not been taken into account in this calculation. Thus these estimates are conservative. There are no published drinking water standards for Cumene. However, it is likely that the toxicity is similar to that of Ethyl Benzene, which has a standard of 0.7ppm. An estimate of the median toxicity to fresh water aquatic organisms is about 10ppm. We estimate the maximum concentration will reach about 0.7ppm about 33 miles downstream of the spill. Monitoring is recommend for any drinking water intakes between the spill location and the junction with the Mississippi River at Cairo. Concentrations of concern to aquatic organisms are expected to be reached a similar distance downstream. If 3700 gallons or less of Cumene is released, we do not expect concentrations toxic to either humans or aquatic organisms to be seen in the Mississippi River below the junction with the Ohio River. [SEP] Based on local weather conditions from the NWS, we looked at a worst case release of 100% of 3700 gallons to the river. Cumene is lighter than water so would float and has a relatively low vapor pressure. The water temperature is low (in the mid 40's) so the expected evaporation rate would be small. ALOHA estimated a TEEL1 maximum distance of 100 yards. TEEL1 is defined as the maximum concentration in air below which it is believed nearly all individuals could be exposed without experiencing other than mild transient adverse health effects or perceiving a clearly defined objectionable odor. The TEEL2 and TEEL3 threat zone estimates were below the minimum distance ALOHA requires (due to near field effects and concentration patchiness near the release) so serious health effects would be a very local concern (10s of yards) Cumene's odor threshold is very low (0.1 ppm) so you could expect the odor zone to extend for a long distance from the release. For a 100% release this could be miles. Some physical property data for Cumene: Flash Point: 96.0 ?? F (USCG, 1999) Lower Explosive Limit: 0.9 % (USCG, 1999) Upper Explosive Limit: 6.5 % (USCG, 1999) Vapor Pressure: 25.85 mm Hg (USCG, 1999) Specific Gravity: 0.866 at 59.0 ?? F (USCG, 1999) TEEL-1 50.0 ppm TEEL-2 50.0 ppm TEEL-3 900.0 ppm  IDLH: 900.0 ppm Based on 10% of the lower explosive limit. (NIOSH, 2003)
At 5:30 a.m. AST the T/V Seabulk Pride broke free from the dock, due to heavy ice conditions, while loading a heavy fuel oil from the Tesoro Refinery at Nikiski, AK. The vessel is a 600 ft. long, double bottom tanker. The vessel has a total of 4,760,364 gallons of various fuel oils on board. [SEP] Photo of grounded vessel and ice - 1 [SEP] Tides for today through Sat [SEP] Photo taken by ADEC on Feb 2, 2006. [SEP] ADEC Photo of T/V Seabulk Pride taken from shore, Feb 2, 2006 (Photo Credit: Unified Command Photo) [SEP] With the tides going to neap, the next day with tides higher than today is in late Feb. [SEP] Weather Forecast from NWS Anchorage in fax form. [SEP] NOS/CO-OPS Real-time water levels tracking tide predictions [SEP] RESPONSE ACTION: On Saturday February 4, 2006 an external dive survey and an internal inspection of the vessel???€?s hull was performed of the ballast water compartments. According to Seabulk personnel, ABS certified divers from Offshore Divers out of Anchorage performed the dive survey. The divers videotaped the cross-sections of the tanker beginning at the stern and progressing to the bow. ABS was aboard the dive boat and viewed a live-feed of the video. While viewing the video, ABS had the ability to direct the divers to specific areas of concern. The survey was initiated Saturday morning February 4, 2006 and was complete by 8:00 PM that evening. A formal report of the dive survey is expected to be completed by ABS later today February 6, 2006 and supplied to the ship???€?s owner and the Coast Guard. According to ABS, no damage was found on the internal cargo compartments and any concerns are limited to the external hull. Significant findings of Saturday???€?s investigations include minor damage to the propeller, propeller shaft, and the ship???€?s hull. In the course of the dive survey, divers found a wire mooring line around the propeller shaft. The dive team was able to successfully remove the line from the shaft and noted slight scoring. Minor light scratches are evident on the propeller and may be indications of the efforts to refloat and pull the vessel from the grounding. Neither the scoring on the shaft nor the propeller scratches reportedly will impair the ability of the vessel to motor or navigate under its own power. Indications of the vessel grounding to the hull are primarily limited to the port side. Numerous indentations and fractures were found in the double bottom hull. In the #5 Port Ballast Tank, the source of the incoming ballast water was located. This area was described to be a four by eight foot area where the hull was strained or stretched to the point where two cracks formed. These cracks are reportedly small with one being approximately four inches and the other about seven inches. Repairs to the hull will be coordinated with ABS and the US Coast Guard. Damage to the valves and manifolds on the vessel???€?s deck are expected to be repaired by today. Pressure testing of the valves and manifolds on deck will be required to ensure that the tanker may be safely offloaded. Several support vessels remain on standby with the T/V Seabulk Pride. They are the Tug Champion, the M/V Seabulk Nevada, the M/V Sand Point and the Tug Sea Voyager. The Coast Guard was on board the T/V Seabulk Pride on Saturday conducting an investigation into the incident. An ADEC spill responder was in Homer monitoring the hull survey over the weekend. [SEP] Photo taken by ADEC on Feb 2, 2006. [SEP] SSC John Whitney arrived on-scene at Nikiski, AK at approximately 1pm PST today. The vessel is aground at position 60-40.60N, 151-24.19W. No pollution reported at this time. At approximately 5:30am AST the vessel broke away from the pier due to ice flow, during loading operations. The vessel was loading unleaded gasoline at the time it broke loose. John is in the Command Post engaged in preparing the In-Situ Burn Checklist. Due to the extensive ice coverage in the area, should a spill occur, burning is a possible response option. The vessel has a total of 113,342 bbls or 4,760,364 gallons of oil onboard. This is made up of: - 3,967,362 gal of Vacuum Tower Bottom Blend, VTBB, API 12.2, pour point 55 def F - 520,800 gal of Heavy Vacuum Oil, API 20.1, pour point 102 deg F - 224,532 gal of Intermediate Fuel Oil (IFO 380) - 47,670 gal of unleaded gasoline Future plans are to lighter the vessel, refloat it, and use tugs to pull it to deeper water during high tide. A tug is due from AK later today, however it is not clear whether this will be sufficient to salvage the vessel today. John Whitney will remain on-scene. NOAA HAZMAT is coordinating with NWS to provide site specific weather forecasts twice a day. Contingency plans are being made to launch additional personnel should the situation change. [SEP] Evening Report, Thursday, February, 2, 2006: 1. Status of the vessel: The T/V SeaBulk Pride remains aground roughly 200 meters north of the Rig Tenders Dock, roughly 100 m offshore and 1 ???€? 2 miles south of the East Forelands in Cook Inlet. The ice conditions are 4-6 tenths new and young ice. On the high tide this evening at 7:52 pm, an attempt will be made to pull the vessel from its grounding. Two small tugs and an offshore service vessel, along with using the propulsion of the vessel itself, will attempt to unground the vessel. Just got word the attempt was postponed until tomorrow morning???€?s high tide at 8:20. 2. The tanker was in the process of loading a cargo of residual heavy oil from the Tesoro Refinery in Nikiski. 107,400 bbls of this heavy residual oil out of a capacity of 350,000 bbls had been loaded prior to a large ice floe, on the flood tide, ripping the vessel, along with its hoses away from the dock in the darkness at 5:30 Thursday morning. The tanker then grounded just north of the loading dock. 2. To date no black oil has been released and there is no apparent damage to the SeaBulk Pride. It is believed to be resting on a course sand to fine gravelly bottom. 3. The following oil spill response actions have been taken as contingency measures in case black oil is released. Two foxtail/lori brush type skimmers have been deployed from two separate CISPRI vessels. These are the only mechanical response devices that have any chance of working in these ice invested waters on a heavy oil. 4. At the same time, approval was obtained to stage ISB ignition equipment ???€? helo and helitorch ???€? to possibly burn any oil that was released and contained among the ice floes. 5. There has been an agreement approved by the USCG and ADEC, in consultation with the shippers, to release PWS equipment and personnel from SERVS to support the Cook Inlet response as follows: Tugs Sea Voyager and Bulwark (ETA late afternoon Th. Feb. 3) Barge 350-3 to use as a lightering barge. 6. In terms of staff, SERVS contractor Crowley will be sending 4 tankermen and 1 supervisor along with the tug and barge crews. SERVS will be sending a total of 15 people: 6 tonight and 9 tomorrow (includes 2 task force leaders, 1 safety person and 1 response person). [SEP] Evening Report ???€? Feb. 3, 2006 1. Tanker was successfully pulled off its original grounding site with the assistance of three tugs on the morning high tide. The weather was calm and very cold (0 to ???€?10F ), similar to what it has been for the past two weeks ???€? a virtual ice-making machine. 2. Helo overflight documented the vessel extraction from the shoal and followed it south in Cook Inlet for over 10 miles. No oil was observed either at the grounding site or along the route of the tanker. 3. A places of refuge application was completed to anchor the tanker in Kachemak Bay for final inspection and assessment. This process involved a teleconference between the Command Post personnel and all the pertinent resource agencies. Plans call for the Coast Guard and other maritime experts to establish the basic integrity of the vessel prior to transiting into the inside portion of K-Bay. Three response vessels escorted the tanker south to K- Bay and will stay with the ship while anchored for final dive inspections in K-Bay. K-Bay is a state designated ???€?critical habitat area???€? as well as being a wintering area for the threatened stellar eider as well as for lots of other wintering waterfowl and seabirds. If the tanker passes the inspections to the satisfaction of the COTP, it plans to sail to Seattle to unload its product and lay up in dry dock for permanent repairs. 4. This evening, the Incident Command Post will be transferred from Nikiski, AK, to Homer, AK, in order to better monitor the
On January 26, 2006, a runaway barge "M-53" loaded with 19,500 barrels of asphalt allided against a railroad bridge on the Ohio River in Louisville, Kentucky. The tug M/V Kelly Lee was heading down river with 3 asphalt barges when the breakaway occurred. Two of the barges were recovered, but one barge is trapped against the K&I Railroad Bridge at river mile 607.4. The USCG reports that the barge is lying on its side with the bottom of the barge against the bridge. The barge was also carrying 15,000 gallons of diesel used to keep the asphalt heated. An unknown amount of asphalt and diesel fuel has been released into the Ohio River. The river is closed to commercial traffic until the situation is resolved. The barge M-53 is owned by Magnolia Marine Transportation. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Ohio River Barge I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 12:00 EDT on January 27, 2006. Information in the report is based on a report of a barge carrying 15,000 gallons of diesel and 19,500 bbls of asphalt collided with a bridge at river mile 605 on the Ohio River at Louisville, Kentucky. Is is suspected that 15,000 gallons of diesel and up to 4,000 bbls of asphalt may have been released. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report is from Louisville downstream to Brandenburg, KY. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material With the strong currents (reported at 4 knots) it is expected that the diesel fuel will mix into the water column and impact animals in the water column. Some product may accumulate along sheltered areas of the shoreline. Assuming the asphalt is heavier than water, it will sink to the bottom and possibly be transported by the currents, coating benthic habitats and possibly effecting benthic organisms. There would be very little risk of shoreline impact from sinking asphalt. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shorelines from the bridge just above river mile 605 to the lock and dam are seawalls and riprap. Downstream of the lock the shorelines are predominately vegetated banks and unconsolidated sediments (sand, gravel, and mixed sand and gravel) with some short sections of riprap. V. Biological Resources at Risk Fish There are numerous species of fish in the Ohio River, including, but no limited to, catfish (channel, blue, and flathead), bluegill, bass (smallmouth, largemouth, spotted, and yellow), and crappie (blue and white), many of which could potential be in the spill area. The diesel fuel may impact some of the fish closer to the water surface. However with the volume of diesel spilled and strong currents, the water column concentrations are not expected to be high enough to cause mortality in the fish. The catfish and any other benthic feeding fish may have their gills coated by sinking asphalt and may also ingest it while feeding. This might result in mortality to some of these fish. Shellfish Various species of clams and mussels may be present in the river. However there are no records of any threatened or endangered species in this area. The mussels and clams may be coated by the asphalt Birds Waterfowl present may include Canada geese, green-winged teal, blue-winged teal, American coot, mergansers, scaup, wood ducks, American black duck, redhead, pintail, and canvasback. Waterfowl may be impacted from an oil spill because of the length of time they spend on the water's surface. Oil can adhere to the feathers reducing insulation, water buoyancy, and water repellency. These symptoms can quickly lead to death from hypothermia and/or drowning. Preening of oiled feathers can cause sickness or death in birds due to ingested oil. Mammals Semi-aquatic fur-bearing mammals, such as river otters, muskrat, and raccoons could occur in the area. Fur-bearing species may be found along the shorelines or within the waters of the river. Fur can become oiled from swimming through oil slicks or contacting oiled vegetation. Matting of the fur due to oiling results in impacts similar to those described for birds. Grooming of contaminated fur can also result in sickness or death depending on the amount of oil ingested. Vegetation There are several species of rare plants on the banks of the Ohio River just below McAlpine dam. Please contact the Kentucky State Nature Preserves Commission at (502) 573-2885 for more details. VI. Human-Use Resources at Risk The accident occurred just upstream of the McAlpine Locks and Dam. This is also the location of Falls of the Ohio State Park in Indiana and Falls of the Ohio NWCA. About 25 miles downstream from the incident is Fort Knox Military Reservation. [SEP] Water level at McAlpine Upper... see attachment http://www.crh.noaa.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lmk&gage=mlpk2&view=1,1,1,1,1,1 Thing to note is that the water level is dropping quickly [SEP] Barge Survey 31 Jan [SEP] Barge 1 [SEP] Barge M 53 Evening Report 27 January 2006 Update: The Barge M 53, operated by Magnolia Marine Transportation, remains hard against the K & I Railroad Bridge. It is assumed that the diesel fuel (approximately 14,000 gallons) used for operations has been released. The cargo (19,500 barrels of asphalt) remains in question. Salvage contractors for the RP believe the port side of the barge is resting on the river bottom and the holds are largely intact. In addition, they believe that the cargo has begun to cool, thereby reducing the possibility of a major release. The US Coast Guard established a unified command at their offices in Louisville, KY consisting of the states of Kentucky, Indiana, Magnolia Marine Transportation, the USEPA (advisors) and the FOSC. NOAA will head the Environmental Unit and the Situation Unit. The salvage contractor delivered a salvage plan this evening involving the heating and lightering of the cargo using a stud barge. Prior to any operations, the barge will be fully surveyed using divers. As the river conditions do not permit divers at this time, it expected that this survey is still several days away. They feel the barge is relatively stable, believing that were the barge to break, it would have done so by now and that river velocities are rapidly decreasing (under normal flow the Ohio River, in the ???€?pools???€? runs at or below a knot). Issues to be reckoned with: >Was there a substantial release of asphalt > Prior to diver survey, how can the level of release be determined > If a substantial release occurred, how can it be mapped and recovered > If no substantial release occurred, what contingency plans should be developed for the salvage operations Future Plans: >NOAA will assist in establishing a working Situation Unit (Genwest) and at the same time help train local Coast Guard personnel in the basics of this unit. > Develop methods to solve the above issues >Retrieve samples for sister barge (USCG Strike Team), reportedly the same product as on the M 53 >Retrieve loading data on the barge to confirm characteristics, including pour point Cargo Data, to date: Asphalt: Specific Gravity: 1.02 Name: ???€?64-22 Asphalt???€? - paving quality On-scene: Steve Lehmann, SSC Arriving Saturday: Renn Hanson, Genwest [SEP] 29Jan Evening Report (ppt) [SEP] Courtesy of USCG Gulf Strike Team [SEP] Diver Survey Result [SEP] Magnolia Barge MM 53 Situation Update 27 February 2006 Salvage Penetrations in the hull of the MM 53 have been made in order to access the cargo compartments. MMT and salvers attached jumpers between the port and starboard heating coils on the # 3 cargo tanks in preparation for heating the asphalt. They are using heating oil from the MM 54 to run the system in those compartments with undamaged coils. As of 26 Feb., the asphalt in #3 starboard was almost at a pumpable temperature (>200??F). This morning salvage crews noticed that leaking was occurring around the cargo hatch, releasing asphalt into the river. This release was controlled, as well as possible, by the use of sorbent boom (see photos) in order to contain the asphalt (it attaches itself well to the boom while hot) long enough to cool the oil and allow it to sink in the immediate front (upriver side) of the barge. The asphalt is piling up in this area and reports indicate that the oil is not migrating around the barge in a significant way. This leak is now under control and lightering continues. In addition, this morning crews noticed a leak from a 2 1/2 inch pressure vacuum valve, emitting a stream of hot asphalt into the river. This, too, appeared to remaining in the deposit of oil in the front of the barge. By noon, the lightering to levels below the valve had caused this leak to stop. The lightering of this tank should be finished within the day or by tomorrow. Each tank will follow the same procedure (access, assessing heating pipes for use or installing new, flexible pipes, heating the asphalt, lightering, venting and securing the tank). The barge will likely continue in place
72' wooden shrimping vessel. Grounded and partially submerged in St. Joseph Sound, off Tarpon Springs, FL [SEP] Tidal Currents [SEP] F/V CAPTAIN CHANCE, TARPON SPRINGS, FL 1330 EST, Tuesday January 17, 2006 Sunset (1/17): 1759 Sunrise (1/18): 0724 Sunset (1/18): 1800 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, the winds are predicted to be from the S at 20-25 knots with gust to 30 knots. Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the SW at 20-25 knots shifting around midnight to be from the NW at 20-25 knots. Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the N at 20-25 knots. _________________________ Seas: Today, the seas are expected to be 4-6 feet. Tonight, the seas are predicted to be 6-8 feet. Wednesday, seas are forecast to be 6-9 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tonight, showers and the possibility of thunderstorms forecast. Wednesday, no precipitation is expected. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tonight, visibility is estimated to be unlimited except for areas of precipitation. Wednesday, visibility is estimated to be unlimited. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs near 70 to lows in the mid 50???€?s. Wednesday, the high is estimated to be near 60 with a low in the upper 30???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, E winds at 10-15 knots. Clear skies. Seas 2-4 feet. Friday, E to SE winds at 15-20 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Seas 3-5 feet. [SEP] To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio From: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: F/V Captain Chance DATE: January 17, 2006, 1430 EST FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a diesel fuel release from the F/V Captain Chance. These notes are based on the following information: On January 17, 2006, at approx 0900 EST, the 72 foot wood shrimp vessel F/V Captain Chance ran aground at location: 28??-09???€?N, 082??-49.9???€?W. This location is about two miles off Tarpon Springs, FL in St. Joseph Sound. The vessel is carrying up to 1,000 gal diesel fuel and about 50 gal. lube oils. It is currently slowly leaking diesel fuel through the vents. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today, winds are expected to be from the S at 20-25 knots, with gusts to 30 knots, shifting to be from the SW tonight. After midnight, the winds will shift to be from the NW at 20-25 knots, shifting to be from the N Wednesday morning. 2) TRAJECTORY: Diesel fuel released slowly from the vessel will result in a small sheen nearby and downwind, the sheen will evaporate and disperse quickly, and will likely be no longer visible after a short distance downwind. In addition, it can be hard to see any sheen in rough conditions. If there is a catastrophic release of the entire cargo, a larger sheen will result, perhaps as large as a mile. The movement of a surface sheen will be dominated by the local winds, until the oil evaporates and disperses and is no longer visible. The tidal currents in that region move primarily North and South, with a maximum velocity of about 0.5 knots. How large the sheen will be, how far it travels, and its persistence is a function of the wind, wave conditions and tidal cycle at the time of release. If the release occurs under the strong winds forecast for today and tomorrow, the sheen will likely be visible for less than a mile. The lube oils will be more persistent, but are in much smaller quantities. A release of all the lube oils at once might result in a small sheen, or be mixed with the diesel oil, and create a slightly more persistent sheen. We don???€?t expect substantial shoreline impacts from the diesel, but there may be some from the lube oil. If the release occurs today, the impacts could be the region of the mouth of the channel to Tarpon Springs. If a release occurs after midnight tonight, then there is a chance of some impact to Three Rooker Bar. If the release occurs during the ebb tide on Wed, it???€?s possible that some small impacts would be seen on North Pt. on Honeymoon Island. If a release occurs, this trajectory can be refined when the time of release is known. 3) WRECKAGE TRAJECTORY: If the ship breaks up, the currents and the wind will move the floating wreckage similarly to the oil. Different parts of the wreckage will float higher in the water, catching the wind more than others, spreading the wreckage out over a larger area. Depending on when the break-up occurs, the wreckage could end up near the mouth of the Tarpon Springs channel, or along the East shore of St. Joseph Sound as far South as Palm Harbor. Some wreckage might be found on Honeymoon Island if there is more of an easterly component to the wind than forecast. 3) OIL FATE: Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. Below is the Oil Fate table from NOAA's ADIOS 2 model, indicating that only about 15% percent of any spilled fuel will still be on the surface 3 hours after the release. Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 20 mph Wave Height = 5 ft Water Temperature = 70 deg F Time of Initial Release = January 17, 1500 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 1,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 1,000 23 43 34 3 1,000 26 59 [SEP] F/V Captain Chance, Tampa FL Initial Report 17 January 2006 Initial Report The 72 foot wooden hull shrimping vessel Captain Chance grounded at position 28-09.0N; 082-49.9W approximately 1.5 miles from shore in 8-9 feet of water. The vessel is reportedly partially submerged and since 0900 this morning has been leaking some diesel fuel from the vessels vents. Total fuel onboard is estimated to be 1000 gallons of diesel and 50 gallons of lube oils. The vessel also has a cargo of 10,000 pounds of shirimp onboard. No other hazmat was reported. Weather on scene is reported to be wind from the NE and seas of 4 feet. Local forecasts indicate that seas will increase to 6-8 feet by tonight. Coast Guard has requested trajectory information and weather. Their concern is for where released oil may go as well as any vessel debris if the wooden boat breaks up.
At 11 pm on January 12, a scrap pile fire was reported at the Southern Scrap Facility in New Orleans.  The fire is at Jordan and Florida avenues near the Lower Ninth Ward.  The debris pile is mostly white goods (household appliances), including stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, etc.  The pile of debris is approximately 400' x 500' and 100 feet tall.  The fire is under control but expected to take several days to extinguish. [SEP] Overflight photo taken by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, Jan 13, 2006 [SEP] Overflight photo taken by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, Jan 13, 2006 [SEP] Overflight photo taken by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, Jan 13, 2006 [SEP] Overflight photo taken by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, Jan 13, 2006 [SEP] On the morning of 13 January 2006, the NOAA SSC was informed of a fire at the Southern Scrap Facility near the Industrial Canal in the extreme western section of St. Bernard Parish. The fire had apparently begun the night before. The SSC was immediately tasked to coordinate and conduct an aerial overflight to assess the source, magnitude, and plume behavior for the ESF-10 Incident Command. An OSC was sent to support the State of Louisiana???€?s Department of Environmental Quality and the New Orleans Parish Fire Department. Due to inclement weather, the overflight began at 1000 hrs. The source of the fire was a 200 x 300 x 40 foot pile of scrapped refrigerators, air conditioners, and other white goods (post-hurricane Katrina debris) that had already been processed to remove Freon at the facility. At he time of the overflight, the fire evolved an area of approximately one half of a football field. Earlier, before the rain and segregation efforts by workers at the facility, the fire had been reported much larger. Strong NW winds in excess of 25 mph tended to force the plume near the ground, and plume height never exceeded 1000 feet. The plume traveled downwind over St. Bernard Parish passing very near the Murphy Oil site before crossing the Mississippi River. The plume extended at least 12 miles from the source. The area downwind remains largely evacuated due to hurricane Katrina and subsequent flooding. Later in the day, the U.S. EPA flew the ASPECT aircraft to assess pollutants in the plume. NOAA HAZMAT???€?s home team in Seattle, WA contacted IMAAC to run a plume trajectory model to support field and air sampling operations. The forecast suggest that condition would remain relatively constant throughout the daylight hours. The firefighting effort was hampered by a lack of water pressure and the nature of the fire itself. The plan evolved to essentially let the fire burn itself out. Crews worked to segregate the debris. Once power was restored to the facility, the scrape metal was processed, some of it still burning, through a metal shredder, sprayed with water, and loaded as chunks of hot scrape metal into an adjacent hopper barge. On 14 January, the fire was completely exhausted. The cause of the fire remains unknown. The Environmental Unit is currently reviewing air-monitoring data. This report will serve as both the initial and final report for this incident.
A sheen about 1/2 by 4 nautical miles in size was spotted 10-12 miles off Grand Isle, LA at 1630 CST, Jan 12, 2006 [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Mystery Sheen: 10-12 miles off Grand Isle, LA. 2200 CST, Thursday, Jan 12, 2006  NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region.   Sunset (1/10): 17:22  Sunrise (1/11): 06:55 Sunset (1/11): 17:23   **WARNINGS**  Small craft warning possible Friday afternoon.  ************  36 Hour forecast:  Tonight: Southeast winds 10 to 15 knots becoming South late. Seas 2 to 3 feet. Isolated showers late in the evening, then scattered showers and thunderstorms well after midnight.  Friday: Southwest winds 10 to 15 knots becoming Northwest 15 to 25 knots in the afternoon. Seas 3 to 4 feet building to 5 to 7 feet in the afternoon. Scattered showers and thunderstorms in the morning...then isolated showers in the afternoon.  Friday Night: North winds 15 to 25 knots. seas 7 to 9 feet.  Saturday: North winds 15 to 25 knots easing to 10 to 15 knots. Seas 5 to 7 feet subsiding to 3 to 5 feet in the afternoon.  Saturday Night: North winds 10 to 15 knots. seas 3 to 5 feet.  Sunday: Northeast winds 10 to 15 knots becoming southeast in the afternoon. seas 2 to 3 feet. [SEP] To: NOAA SSC Willie Whitmore From: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Slick off Grand Isle, LA. DATE: January 12, 2006, 2230 CST  FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526 4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a slick of unknown origin sighted off Grand Isle, LA  These notes are based on the following information:  At 1630 CST a sheen about 1/2 by 4 nm in size was spotteed about 10-15 miles off Grand Isle, LA. The location was: 29d01'09"N - 90d04'06"W. The sheen was heading WNW.  If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________  1) WEATHER: Tonight, Southeast winds of 10 to 15 knots becoming South late are expected. The winds are then expected to shift to the Southwest Friday, then Northwest at 15-25 knots Friday afternoon, and North at 15-25 Friday night.  2) TRAJECTORY: The movement of a surface sheen will be dominated by the local winds, until the oil evaporates and disperses. The forecast winds are from the Southeast and South for the next 12-16 hrs, which will move the oil toward shore. In addition, the coastal current in the region is expected to be moving downcoast, to the west, at about 1/4 to maybe as much as 1/2 knot. At the highest forecast wind speed, the sheen could move as much as 8 miles toward shore before the forecast shift in the winds Friday afternoon starts to move the sheen offshore again. In this time, the currents could move the sheen 4 to 8 miles downcoast. We do not expect the sheen to impact the shoreline.  3) OIL FATE: Without knowing what the product is, we can't forecast its persistence. If it is a light product, like a diesel fuel, it could be no longer visible in as little as 10-12 hrs. A heavier product could last a great deal longer, but will eventually break up into scattered sheen and small tarballs. The strong winds predicted for Friday afternoon and night are likely to break up the sheen if it persists that long.
The F/V Northern Orion, a 165' vessel, is dead in the water off northern Oregon about 18-20 miles off Clatsop Spit. The vessel has approximately 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel onboard. [SEP] Date; Jan 10, 2006 1130 PST  To: NOAA SSC Demain Bailey FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: F/V Northern Orion adrift off Oregon  FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The F/V Northern Orion, a 165' vessel, is dead in the water off northern Oregon about 18-20 miles off Clatsop Spit. The location is reported to be 46?? 06.201'N by 124?? 28.363' W. The vessel has approximately 20,000 gallons of diesel fuel onboard. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect the trajectory. _______________________________________________________ 1) Wind Forecast This afternoon: 10-15 knots from the SW Tonight: 15-20 knots from the SW Tomorrow: 15-20 from the W  2) Trajectory Analysis  Currents on the inner half of the shelf are toward the north at 1/3 to 1/2 knot.  We expect the vessel to move to the NE toward the Washington coast with the forecast winds and currents. If the vessel is high in the water and the winds are stronger than expected, the vessel could landfall soon after midnight tonight between Cape Disappointment and Long Beach. If the vessel is lower in the water or the winds are on the less than forecast, expected landfall is between noon tomorrow and tomorrow evening, anywhere from Ocean Park to the entrance to Willapa Bay.  Note: The trajectory can be refined with additional drift information over time.  3) Oil Fate  Given the sea state, a spill of 20,000 gallons of diesel will disperse quickly. A sheen of 2-3 miles, persisting for 4-6 hours is what we would expect.  ADIOS II Oil Fate estimate: To view table properly use fixed width font like monaco.  Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = 10 ft ______________________________________________________________________  Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 20,000 7 5 88 2 20,000 16 18 67 3 20,000 22 39 39 4 20,000 25 61 14 5 20,000 26 72 2 [SEP] F/V Northern Orion: 20 miles off Oregon Coast 1100 PST, Tuesday, Jan 10, 2006  NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region.   Sunset (1/10): 4:53pm  Sunrise (1/11): 7:58am Sunset (1/11): 4:54pm   **WARNINGS**  Small craft advisory in effect through Wednesday evening.  ************  36 Hour forecast:  Winds and Precipitation:  Today: SW wind 25 to 30 kt. Easing to 10 to 15 kt this afternoon. Wind waves 4 to 5 ft. W swell 20 ft at 12-15 seconds. Rain.  Tonight: SW wind 15 to 20 kt with gusts to 25. Wind waves 6 ft. W swell 15 to 20 ft at 13 seconds. Rain.  Wednesday: W wind 15 to 20 kt with gusts to 25. Wind waves 4 ft. W swell 15 ft at 12 seconds. Rain likely.  Wednesday Night: SW wind 10 to 15 kt. Wind waves 2-3 ft. W swell 15 ft. Chance of showers.  Thursday: SE wind 20 to 25 kt. Wind waves 5 ft. W swell 12 ft. Rain likely.  Thursday Night: S wind 25 to 30 kt with gusts to 35 kt. Combined seas 14 ft. Rain likely.  Friday: S wind 20 to 25 kt with gusts to 35 kt. Wind waves 7 ft. SW swell 15 ft.  Saturday: SW wind 25 to 30 kt with gusts to 35 kt. Combined seas 20 to 25 ft.
At 0500 EST On January 3, 2006, the 80 foot fishing vessel F/V Hail Mary II grounded in Shinnecock Bay, NY. The vessel was carrying an estimated 6,000 gal diesel fuel, and was not leaking. On Friday, Jan 5th, the vessel was located at 72deg 28.63' W by 40deg 50.44'N. Plans were in place to move the vessel to 72deg 28.96' W by 40deg 50.57'N on Saturday afternoon at about 1400. The vessel was estimated to have between 4,000 and 6,000 gallons of diesel fuel onboard. The Hail Mary II was hung up on the west bank of jetty lining the Shinnecock Inlet. The offshore weather conditions prohibited the arrival of a barge with crane to do the salvage operation. The USCG received the RP's salvage plan and eventually allowed the fishing vessel to be lifted and taken for repairs. [SEP] Shio Tidal Current forecast for Shinnecock Inlet [SEP] Shio Tidal Current forecast for Ponquogue Bridge [SEP] To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine From: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: F/V Hail Mary II, Shinnecock Bay, NY. DATE: January 3, 2006, 1330 EST FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a potential release of diesel fuel from the F/V Hail Mary II. These notes are based on the following information: At 0500 EST On January 3, 2006, the 80 foot fishing vessel F/V Hail Mary II grounded in Shinnecock Bay, NY. It is currently 95% submerged at location: 40??-51???€?N, 72??-29???€?W. The vessel is carrying approx. 6,000 gal diesel fuel, and is not known to be leaking at this time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the NE at 25-30 knots. Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the N at 20-25 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: The currents in Shinnecock Bay are dominated by tides. Depending on when in the tidal cycle any release occurs, the oil could be carried as far as 1/2 miles East of Shinnecock Inlet to the East, or 1/2 mile West of the Ponquogue Bridge to the west. The strong NE and N winds forecast for the next couple days will tend to move the oil to the South and Southwest, so that shorelines affected will most likely be the Warner Islands and the North side of the barrier islands on either side of Shinnecock Inlet. Under these strong winds, beach impacts could occur in as little as one hour after a release. When small diesel spills strand on the shoreline, the oil tends to be washed off quickly by waves and tidal flushing If Fuel is released during an ebb tide, some of the diesel could be carried out of Shinnecock Inlet by the tidal currents. Any oil carried outside the inlet will then be moved by the winds as a sheen, to the South, away from shore. It is unlikely that this fuel will impact the shoreline on the south side of the barrier islands. 3) OIL FATE: Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. Below is the Oil Fate table from NOAA's ADIOS 2 model, indicating that only about 11 percent of any spilled fuel will still be on the surface 10 hours from the release. Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (ALASKA) API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 25 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 50 deg F Time of Initial Release = January 3, 1200 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 6,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 6,000 - 35 - 7 - 58 3 6,000 - 43 - 13 - 44 4 6,000 - 48 - 18 - 34 5 6,000 - 51 - 23 - 27 6 6,000 - 52 - 26 - 22 7 6,000 - 53 - 29 - 18 8 6,000 - 54 - 31 - 15 9 6,000 - 54 - 33 - 13 10 6,000 - 55 - 34 - 11 [SEP] To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine / USCG Lt. Kelly Bourcet From: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: F/V Hail Mary II, Shinnecock Bay, NY. DATE: Friday, January 5, 2006, 1430 EST FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ These notes are based on the following information: At 0500 EST On January 3, 2006, the 80 foot fishing vessel F/V Hail Mary II grounded in Shinnecock Bay, NY at location: 40??-51???€?N, 72??-29???€?W. The vessel was carrying an estimated 6,000 gal diesel fuel, and was not leaking. On Friday, Jan 5th, the vessel was located at 72?? 28.63' W by 40?? 50.44'N. Plans are in place to move the vessel further to 72?? 28.96' W by 40?? 50.57'N on Saturday afternoon at about 1400. The vessel is estimated to have between 2,000 and 4,000 gallons of diesel fuel onboard. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: Tonight: Winds from NW at 15-20 knots Saturday morning: Winds from NW at 15-20 knots Saturday afternoon: Winds from WNW at 10 - 15 knots Saturday night: Winds from W to SW at 10 - 15 knots Dry conditions with no precipitation. 2) Tidal currents at Shinnecock Inlet ------------------------------------------------------- 01/07/2006 00:25 +2.2 Max Flood Sat 03:05 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 06:32 -1.8 Max Ebb 10:42 +0.0 Min Before Flood 12:55 +2.0 Max Flood 15:17 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 18:35 -1.9 Max Ebb 22:51 +0.0 Min Before Flood 3) TRAJECTORY: A diesel spill of 4,000 gallons from the vessel tomorrow afternoon between 1300 and 1500 would result in a sheen that would move to the S to SSE under the influence of the WNW winds and the last half of the flood tide. We would expect a bathtub ring type stain to occur on the north side of the Warner Islands within 1/2 hr of a spill and along the south shore of Shinnecock Bay within 1 hr of a spill. Impacts on the south shore of the bay would be confined to 1 - 2 miles of shoreline, S to SE of where the spill occurred. 3) OIL FATE: View with fixed with font (monaco works) Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Total Amount of Oil Released = 4,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 4,000 - 15 - 2 - 84 2 4,000 28 5 66 3 4,000 - 37 - 11 - 52 4 4,000 43 18 39 5 4,000 - 47 - 23 - 30 6 4,000 49 28 24 7 4,000 - 50 - 31 - 19 8 4,000 51 34 15 9 4,000 - 51 - 36 - 13 10 4,000 52 38 11 11 4,000 - 52 - 39 - 9 [SEP] Small Diesel Spill Summary [SEP] F/V HALE MARY II, SHINNECOOCK INLET, LONG ISLAND, NY 1230 EST, Tuesday January 03, 2006 Sunset (1/03): 1637 Sunrise (1/04): 0717 Sunset (1/04): 1638 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the NE at 25-30 knots. Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the N at 20-25 knots. _________________________ Seas: Today through Thursday, seas in Shinnecock Bay and Inlet are forecast to be choppy. Thursday, seas are expected to be 3-5 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tonight, rain with areas of fog are forecast in the region. Slight chance of sleet or snow today and tonight. Wednesday, no precipitation is expected. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tonight, visibility is estimated to be 1-3 nm. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the upper 30???€?s to lows in the lower 30???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, SW winds at 10-15 knots. Cloudy skies. Chance of rain or snow. Friday, N winds at 10-15 knots increasing later in the day to 15-20 knots. Partly
The containership M/V Panama grounded on a sand bar on Christmas Day 2005, 300ft off the main dock at Ensenada, B.C.S. Mexico.  There has been no fuel release at the time of notification.  Two tugs from Los Angeles have responded to remove the vessel.  USCG District 11 has requested NOAA Hazmat trajectory products. [SEP] This is the tidal Height Forecast for Ensenada, Mexico:  Dec 28-30, 2005 [SEP] M/V PANAMA: GROUNDED CONTAINER SHIP OFF ENSENADA MEXICO  1130 PST, Wednesday, Dec 28th, 2005  NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region.  Sunset (12/28): 4:51 p.m.  Sunrise (12/29): 6:50 a.m. Sunset (12/29): 4:51 p.m.   36 Hour Forecast. -------------------------- Warnings:  High Surf Advisory until 6pm PST Friday. Then very high waves expected next week.  Weather:  Today -- Wind NW 10 kt near-shore and 15 kt offshore. Patchy fog early in the morning. Slight chance of rain in the afternoon.  Tonight -- Wind NW 10 kt near-shore and 15 kt offshore. Light chance of rain in the evening.  Thursday -- Wind N 5-10 kt near-shore and 10 kt offshore. Becoming W in the afternoon.  Thursday Night -- Wind N about 5 kt near-shore and offshore. Patchy fog.  Friday -- Wind NE 3-5 kt. Patchy fog in the morning. Slight chance of rain in the afternoon.  Waves:   Today -- Wind waves 2 ft or less. Swell WNW 6 to 10 ft at 20 seconds.  Tonight -- Wind waves 2 ft or less. Swell WNW 6 to 9 ft at 17 seconds.  Thursday -- Wind waves 2 ft or less. Swell WNW 6 to 10 ft at 17 seconds.  Thursday Night -- Wind waves 2 ft or less. Swell WNW 6 to 12 ft at 15 seconds.  Friday -- Wind waves 2 ft or less. Swell W 6 to 10 ft.    Extended Forecast:  Winds are expected to be from SW at 10 to 15 kt. Saturday, then NW at 10 kt Sunday. Wind waves 2 ft or less. Swell WNW 6 to 8 ft. through Sunday. Rain likely Saturday, then chance of showers Saturday evening and Sunday. [SEP] Date: 1130 PST December 28, 2005 To: NOAA SSC John Whitney  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Container Ship grounded off Port of Ensenada  FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a potential fuel oil spill off the Port of Ensenada, Mexico. These notes are based on the following information:  The container ship M/V Panama is reported aground 300 feet off the main dock at the Port of Ensenada, Mexico. The vessel has been aground since December 25, 2005 and is currently not leaking. Two tugs are on on-scene to begin pulling the vessel when the weather and tides are appropriate. The vessel is carrying an unknown amount of Bunker C fuel as fuel for the vessel.  If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast A high surf advisory is in effect until 1800 hrs Friday. Very high waves are expected next week. Today winds are forecast to be from the NW at 10 knots. Slight chance of rain this afternoon and evening  2) TRAJECTORY The coastal currents near Ensenada generally follow the winds. The NOAA Ocean Current Analysis - Realtime (OSCAR) show the 5-day average currents flowing equatorward at approx. 0.2 knots. The winds through Friday are forecast to have a northerly component, hence the currents and any oil released in exiting the Bahia de Todos Santos would be expected to move toward the south.
NOAA HAZMAT was requested to assist in locating two missing Mobile Offshore Drilling Units (MODU) that were set adrift and presumably sunk during Hurricane Rita.  The rigs are the MODUs ROWAN FT. WORTH and the ROWAN HALIFAX. Both rigs are LeTourneau 116-C design, hull dimensions are 243L X 200W X 26D(not counting super structure).  Each are equipped with 477' legs. [SEP] MODU trajectory picture [SEP] *note - attached Word doc has the table at the end formatted nicely* Date: December 23, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, NOAA SSC Jim Morris  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Missing MODUs following Hurricane Rita, offshore LA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of missing MODUs lost during Hurricane Rita. These notes are based on the following information: Two Mobile Offshore Drilling Units (MODUs) were lost during the period of Hurricane Rita???€?s passage through the area, presumably from the hurricane conditions: the Rowan Halifax (28 deg 04???€? 26???€?N, 092 deg 41???€? 56???€?W) and the Rowan Fort Worth (28 deg 14???€? 33???€?, 092 deg 00???€? 40???€?W). MODUs are designed similarly to ships and therefore can float. Emergency procedures aboard the MODUs require the crew to make the platform watertight before evacuating by ???€?dogging???€? all the doors and hatches. The MODUs were sheared off from their legs, leaving the legs at the original location. The legs of the Rowan Halifax are currently directed due WSW, and the legs of the Rowan Fort Worth are directed W to WNW. The area from 260 ???€? 010 deg T (clockwise) has been searched out as far as 12 nm from the original location using side scan sonar. A MODU in between these two, the Rowan Louisiana, was found on the beach 83 nm away at a heading of 350 deg from the original location. The legs from the Rowan Louisiana were tilted 35 deg off the bottom in a NW direction similar to the ultimate resting location of the MODU. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ Background Hurricane Rita is estimated to have passed directly over the Rowan Halifax, and to the SW of the Rowan Louisiana and Rowan Fort Worth. The Rowan Louisiana???€?s final location on the shoreline indicates that these MODUs can float for a significant period of time. Therefore our discussions (one for each missing MODU) will reflect two different scenarios. The first is the short time-scale of the MODU shearing off and sinking within six hours. The second is a longer-term trajectory assuming the MODU remained afloat without sinking. NOAA HAZMAT has information regarding the locations where other drifting MODUs were found in the Gulf of Mexico. See attached graphic showing a summary of the initial and final locations for these other MODUs. We expect that these MODUs did not take a straight-line path from their original to the final locations as the lines on the graphic depict. Recently published data from Hurricane Ivan shows current speed and direction, and significant wave height from instruments located along the hurricane track. We think these data are useful in considering what may have happened to the Rowan Halifax as Hurricane Rita passed directly over. Along the Hurricane Ivan track the significant wave height peaked approximately six hours before the passage of the eye, with currents decreasing from approx 1.2 ???€? 0 m/s and varying in direction between WSW and W over that six hour period. These directions are 120-100 degree counterclockwise from the storm track during that six-hour period. NOAA National Data Buoy Center buoy 42040 was located just to the ???€?left???€? of the hurricane track, and the buoy broke free from its mooring during the passage of the hurricane eye. The initial drift of this buoy was in the SW direction approx 145 deg counterclockwise from the storm track. Case 1 ???€? Rowan Halifax From the above information we estimate that the search area for the Rowan Halifax would be between 140 deg to 270 deg T (clockwise) out as far as 15 nm from the original location of the MODU. If this MODU remained afloat, it would be very near the eye of the hurricane track and experience winds quite different from the Rowan Louisiana on the ???€?right???€? side of the hurricane track. The Rowan Halifax is likely to have moved offshore toward the shelf break where it could get caught up in the upcoast (Texas -> Louisiana) recirculation along the outer shelf or be picked up by the Loop Current depending on how far offshore it traveled. Case 2 ???€? Rowan Fort Worth The Rowan Fort Worth was further outside the ???€?right???€? side of the hurricane track than the Rowan Louisiana, so we would expect it to behave similarly with relatively weaker currents and winds. If the Rowan Fort Worth sank within six hours of breaking free, we recommend a search area of 270 ???€? 030 deg T (clockwise) out to about 12 nm. If the MODU floated for a significant amount of time, we expect that it would have drifted similarly to other MODUs that separated during the hurricane. Below is a table showing information about the platform trajectories shown in the graphic. We have listed (1) the platform name, (2) the minimum distance from the original platform location to the Hurricane Rita track, (3) the total distance traveled by the platforms (except for the missing MODUs), (4) the angle of the overall trajectory of the platform relative to the hurricane track, and (5) notes. Our hypothesis is that the platforms of similar distances from the eye of the hurricane would experience similar winds and have similar trajectories. The table is sorted from greatest to shortest distance from the hurricane track. Note that there is a rough trend for smaller angles with greater distances from the hurricane track. We expect the Rowan Fort Worth would have an overall trajectory toward the shoreline between 15 and 45 deg (clockwise) relative to the hurricane track, which translates to 325 ???€? 355 deg T (clockwise). The Deep Nautilus and the Noble Therald Martin have shorter tracks than the others. Since we believe the real trajectories traveled an arc initially more to the ???€?left???€?, we think these do fit with our analysis. Thus the search area for the Rowan Fort Worth would be in the general direction of 325 ???€? 355 deg T (clockwise) with the long boundaries skewed somewhat to the left as shown in the graphic. (1)Platform (2)Minimum distance from final location to hurricane track (nm) (3)Distance MODU traveled (nm) (4)Angle from Hurricane track (5)Notes 1 2 3 4 5 Deep Nautilus 99 33 30 short Diamond Ocean Saratoga 60 113 10 Noble Paul Romano 59 77 5 Noble Max Smith 46 108 10 Noble Therald Martin 43 46 -8 short Transocean Marianas 38 129 15 Rowan Fort Worth 37 Diamond Ocean Star 24 74 35 Rowan Louisiana 24 80 45 Noble Amos Runner 19 59 40 Rowan Halifax 5 [SEP] Photograph from USCG of damaged rig for comparison purposes [SEP] The Red dot shows the original location of the Rowan Halifax, while the yellow dot shows the location where this MODU was found inside the HAZMAT best guess search area. The Rowan Fort Worth has yet to be located. [SEP] Genwest map showing rig and platform damage from Katrina [SEP] Photo from USCG of missing rig [SEP] Map showing before and after rig positions [SEP] Photograph from USCG- Damaged rig High Island III for comparison purposes. The missing rigs may have sustained damage like this prior to sinking. Note the damage to the legs of the MODU. These legs are triangular in cross section. The legs on the Rowan Rigs were square. [SEP] Photograph from USCG of rig. [SEP] From Hurricane Rita Response Link Folder
At approximately 0800 hours on December 16, 2005 a leaking valve was first observed at the Conoco-Phillips Rahway River Tank Field, adjacent to the Rahway River, New Jersey.  The valve was immediately replaced and the discharge of oil/water was stopped.  The product was primarily discharged off site at the edge of the property where it slopes down to the perimeter of the closed Linden Landfill.  The released product was a mixture of No. 2 heating oil (red dyed) and water.  Data from tank guages indicate 1,950 barrels of oil/water are unaccounted for.  Clean-up response includes vacuum trucks and deflection/exclusion booming operations in the Rahway River. Habitats at risk include wetlands, mudflats and river/estuary.  Oiled wildlife has been reported. [SEP] Photo from EPA OSC of the Conoco Philips spill area. The photo is date stamped the 12/16/2005 but is believed to be from 12/17/2005 [SEP] Tidal Heights - Rahway River [SEP] From Frank Csulak, 12/18/05 Description of Incident On Friday, 12/16/05 at 0800 hours Conoco Phillips discovered that an oil spill took place at their Rahway River Tank Field located in Linden, NJ. It is believed that the cause of the spill was due to a frozen pipeline valve that cracked due to frozen water in the line. The pipe, which burst at the valve, empties 18 above ground oil storage tanks. Conoco Phillips, US EPA, and NJDEP has estimated that 84,000 gallons of a heating fuel oil (No. 2 oil) and water mix was released. The oil then flowed into a nearby wetland area, the Rahway River and the Arthur Kill waterway. Officials estimate that maybe as much as 10,000 gallons of oil entered the water. Conoco Phillipps Bayway Refinery, which owns the refinery and pipelines has assumed the role of the Responsible Party. Linden, NJ is a mixed use of commercial, residential, and industrial uses. Newark International Airport is located just to the north of the spill site and the NJ Turnpike is located to the just to the west of the spill site. Staten Island, NY is located on the eastern side of the Arthur Kill. The primary areas of concern include the Rahway River, the Arthur Kill and it associated tributaries, Pralls Island, and several wetland restoration sites located along both the NJ and Staten Island, NY shorelines. Description of Cleanup Response Ed Levine, NOAA???€?s SSC has provided both on-scene and off-scene scientific support to the FOSC and SOSC, including aerial overflight support, mapping, trajectory information and information on the spilled oil. As of today the following Federal, State and local agencies and organizations have responded to the incident, including USEPA, USCG, NYDEC, NJDEP, NJ State Police, City of Linden, Union County Emergency Management, Tri-State Bird and Rescue, and NOAA. The USEPA is serving as FOSC. An Incident Action Plan and Site Safety Plans have been prepared and made available to all responders. Approximately 200 contractors have been brought in to clean up the spill. A number of skimmer vessels and vacuume trucks are working the area. Several lines of booms have been placed across the Rahway River. Clean-up contractors are also on-scene including Miller Marine and Clean Harbors. I have not been able to obtain any information on amount of product recovered. The Command Center is located at the Conoco Phillips Refinery, Linden, NJ. Trajectory The oil within Arthur Kill has been primarily moving with the tides, while the winds are expected to keep the oil to the eastern (Staten Island) side of the Kill. The northern extent of the oil has moved north to the Goethals Bridge and the southern extent to the Outer Bridge Crossing, with the southern extent possibly moving as far downstream as the Raritan River. Description of Damage Assessment Response NOAA is the only trustee on-scene, although I have communicated with John Sacco from NJDEP???€?s Office of Natural Resource Damages. I have not seen anyone from NYSDEC, NYC Parks or DOI???€?s FWS for NRDA purposes. Neither NOAA GC or RC have been involved with the response. Plan is to coordinate with NYSDEC, NYC Parks and USFWS as required. Conoco Phillips has contracted with ENTRIX and Shaw Environmental Services for NRDA support. I have informally invited the RP to conduct a cooperative assessment and they have agreed. The RP has provided NOAA with overflights and access to their contractors. Source oil sample has been collected and split with one sample for NOAA and one for the RP. Water and sediment samples have been collected at numerous locations in the Rahway River, Arthur Kill and associated wetland and shoreline area for both reference and impact areas. All samples are being maintained and stored. No arrangements have been made for analysis at this time. Photographs of spill area have been taken of the affected areas. Potential for Damage Assessment NOAA trustee resources potentially at risk include wetlands, shorelines, finfish, shellfish, benthic habitat and water column. Due to the time of year finfish and shellfish are not in great abundant, although there are several fish species that over winter in the local waterways, including perch, striped bass, and flounder. Impacts to recreational activities such as boating would be expected to be minimal, if at all because of the time of year and lack of recreational activities taking place in this area. There haven???€?t been any navigational, fishery, or park closures reported. No T&E species concerns to my knowledge. Other trustee resources potentially at risk include several bird groups including waterfowl, geese, and gulls, although very few have been observed. Several oiled geese have been observed and at least one was captured for rehabilitation by Tri-State but died. One oiled rabbit has also died despite heroic efforts to save it. At a minimum it is expected that there will be wetland impacts. There are Red Maple, fragmitties and spartina wetlands along the Rahway River that have been exposed to the oil. There have also been spartina wetlands along the Arthur Kill that have been exposed to the oil. In total an estimated 5-10 acres of wetlands have been oiled. Terrapin habitat may also been exposed to the oil based on ESI maps. Significant Events for the Next 24 Hours Need to coordinate with NJDEP, NYSDEC, NYC Parks, and USFWS for the purposes of bringing the trustees up to date on the incident and discuss future plans. Need to coordinate with NOAA HAZMAT, DAC, RC and GC programs. Continue collecting water and sediment samples as needed. Continue to coordinate with RP and co-trustees. [SEP] Credit Ed Levine, NOAA [SEP] Overflight map prepared by Ed Levine [SEP] Tidal Currents - Tremley Point [SEP] Photo from EPA OSC of the Conoco Philips spill area. The photo is date stamped the 12/16/2005 but is believed to be from 12/17/2005 [SEP] Photo from EPA OSC of the Conoco Philips spill area. The photo is date stamped the 12/16/2005 but is believed to be from 12/17/2005 [SEP] Prepared by Frank Csulak [SEP] Conoco Phillops Bayway, Rahway River, NJ 1130 EST, Saturday December 17, 2005 This is a site specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (12/17): 1627 EDT Sunrise (12/18): 0711 Sunset (12/18): 1628  36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today winds are from the W at 10 knots, decreasing to be from the W at 5-10 knots this evening. Around midnight winds are expected to change direction to be from the NNW to NW at 5-10 knots and remain through the evening Precipitation: Dry conditions are forecast Ceiling/Visibility: Ceilings today are expected to be 25,000 feet or higher with unlimited visibility. Tomorrow morning ceilings are predicted to be 10,000-12,000 feet increasing to 25,000 feet by mid afternoon, with unlimited visibility. Temperatures: Today???€?s high temperature is expected to be 40 F with a low tonight in the upper 20s F. Tomorrow high is expected to be in the lower 40s F with a low in the upper 20s F. Extended Forecast ???€? Days 3-5: Monday-Wednesday: Dry conditions with unlimited visibility. High temperatures in the upper 30s F ???€? low 40s F with lows in the mid 20s F. Winds during the day from the W at 10-15 knots, and at night from the W at 5-10 knots. [SEP] Tri-State Wildlife Rescue Report [SEP] Photo from EPA OSC of the Conoco Philips spill area. The photo is date stamped the 12/16/2005 but is believed to be from 12/17/2005
The 68-foot fishing vessel SKY SUN ran aground on the eastern shore of the Big Island.  The longline fishing vessel is loaded with 3,000 gallons of diesel and has 4 tons of fish on board.  The grounding site is near the southern end of the Waiopae Tidepools Marine Life Conservation District 25 miles southeast of Hilo.  The four crew members and a National Marine Fisheries Service observer were rescued via helocopter.  There were no injuries.  NOAA HAZMAT was notified and requested to provide weather forecasts to assist with salvage. [SEP] VESSEL GROUNDING CAPE KUMUKAHI, BIG ISLAND, HI 0830 HST, Wednesday December 16, 2005 Sunset (12/16): 1743 Sunrise (12/17): 0646 Sunset (12/17): 1744 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Saturday, during the day the winds are predicted to be from the E at 10 knots or less at night the winds are forecast to be from the W-SW at 10 knots or less. _________________________ Seas: VESSEL GROUNDING CAPE KUMUKAHI, BIG ISLAND, HI 0830 HST, Wednesday December 16, 2005 Sunset (12/16): 1743 Sunrise (12/17): 0646 Sunset (12/17): 1744 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Saturday, during the day the winds are predicted to be from the E at 10 knots or less at night the winds are forecast to be from the W-SW at 10 knots or less. _________________________ Seas: Today through Saturday, wind wave is forecast to be 2-3 feet. The swell offshore is expected to be from the NW at 6 feet increasing to 11 feet this afternoon. Tonight through Saturday, the swell is expected to be 9-10 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Saturday, no precipitation is expected in the region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, partly cloudy skies are predicted. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the upper 70 to lows in the upper 60???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, SW to W winds at 10-15. Partly cloudy skies. Showers late in the day. Monday, NE winds at 10-15. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of showers. Tuesday, Variable winds less than 10 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of showers.
On December 12, 2005, at approximately 5:30 AM, the fishing vessel Captain A.B. grounded in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fl, near Jacksonville, FL. The grounding site is just north of Guana River State Park, Fla. There were no injuries or pollution as a result of the grounding.  The vessel is carrying 4500 gallons of diesel and 300 gallons of lube oil. [SEP] USCG Photo of grounded vessel [SEP] USCG Photo [SEP] Date: 1800 EST, Wednesday, December 14, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio/USCG Lt. Bigbie FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded fishing vessel, south of Jacksonville, FL FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a potential release of diesel and lube oil from a grounded shrimper. These notes are based on the following information: The F/V Captain A.B. is reported grounded on the beach and not leaking, located approx. 2 nm south of Mickler Landing, FL, at 39 deg 07.1???€?N, 081 deg 20.7???€?W. It has an estimated 4500-5000 gallons of diesel fuel and 500 gallons of lube oil onboard. Note: should the vessel actually lose a significant amount of oil, we should be notified and requested to update the trajectory. Environmental conditions and assumptions may need to be updated. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the E to SE at 10-15 knots. Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the S at 20-25 knots becoming NW at 20-25 knots in the afternoon with the passage of a cold front. Seas tonight is expected to be 3-4 feet becoming 3-5 feet tomorrow. 2) TRAJECTORY Should a significant amount of the diesel oil be spilled within a short period of time, we would expect a sheen that extended for 1/2 to 1 mile. A sheen from the lube oil would extend for only a few hundred yards. Should a spill occur tonight or tomorrow under SE or S wind conditions, we would expect a visible sheen that would extend to the north along the beach. A bathtub ring type coating of oil may occur in the immediate vicinity of the vessel and extend to the north for a few hundred yards. If the oil is spilled under the strong 20-25 knot NW winds we would expect the sheen to extend downwind to the SE and offshore. 3) OIL FATE See attached document concerning small diesel spills. Result from ADIOS II Oil Fate model Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) Total Amount of Oil Released = 5,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 5,000 - 10 - 4 - 87 2 5,000 19 13 67 3 5,000 - 27 - 29 - 45 4 5,000 31 44 26 5 5,000 - 32 - 53 - 15 6 5,000 33 58 9 Oil Name = LUBRICATING OIL Total Amount of Oil Released = 500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 500 - 0 - 6 - 94 2 500 0 15 85 4 500 - 0 - 31 - 68 6 500 0 45 55 8 500 - 0 - 56 - 44 10 500 0 65 35 12 500 - 0 - 71 - 28 14 500 0 77 23 16 500 - 0 - 81 - 18 18 500 0 85 15 20 500 - 1 - 88 - 12 22 500 1 90 9 [SEP] GROUNDED F/V CAPTAIN A. B., JACKSONVILLE, FL 1530 EST, Wednesday December 14, 2005 Sunset (12/14): 1713 Sunrise (12/15): 0714 Sunset (12/15): 1727 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the E to SE at 10-15 knots. Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the S at 20-25 knots becoming NW at 20-25 knots in the afternoon with the passage of a cold front. _________________________ Seas: Tonight, seas are forecast to be 3-4 feet. Thursday, seas are expected to be 3-5 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tonight, showers are forecast in the region. Tuesday, no precipitation is expected. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, partly isolated showers are expected. Thursday, scattered showers with a chance of thundershowers are expected. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the near 70 to lows in the low 50???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, N winds at 20-25 decreasing in the afternoon to 15-20 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Saturday, NE winds at 10-15. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of showers. Sunday, N to NE winds at 15-20. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of showers.
The Barge PINEY POINT being towed by tug BARBARY COAST ran aground near Kingsland Reach on the James River, VA. The capacity of the barge is 22,000 bbls. [SEP] The first photo is of the PINEY POINT is at high tide just as transfer of the asphalt began. The state of the water over the deck of the Piney Point should be compared to the increase in draft shown in the second photo that was taken 30 minutes latter at 1600 hours. [SEP] This second photo shows the about of freeboard that was gained in 30 minutes. [SEP] Date: 1500 EST November 28, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Gary Ott FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded Barge Piney Point, James River, VA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of an asphalt spill from a grounded barge in the James River. These notes are based on the following information: The Barge Piney Point ran aground near Kingsland Reach on the James River early today with a capacity of 22,000 bbls of heated asphalt (heating was shut down once spill was detected). Position reported at 37 deg 24.2???€?N, 077 deg 23.6???€? W. By 0915 EST the leak was reported subsided, but a later report at 1036 EST observed more product escaping. The oil is reported heavier than seawater (density 1.04 g/cm3). If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the S to SE at 10-15 knots with gust to 22 knots. Tuesday, the winds are forecast to be from the S at 15-20 knots shifting in the afternoon with the passage of a cold front to be from the NW at 10-15 knots. Rain Tuesday may raise the river as much as 5-6 feet (still below flood stage). 2) TRAJECTORY Oil released is expected to sink to the bottom. Movement of oil on the bottom depends on how the oil behaves as it cools in the water of the James River. If the oil is soft, and sticky it may stay on the bottom locally where it was spilled. If the oil breaks into solid tarballs, we expect these could roll around on the bottom with the bottom currents. Tides over the next few days have a maximum current of 1.1 knots leading to a tidal excursion of 3-4 nm. The freshet of water associated with tomorrow???€?s rains could wash the oil further downriver, as much as 10 nm during the even. [SEP] Attempts to pump out water from the forward rake the night of 29 Nov and early 30 Nov failed. During the night, as the tide fell, divers were able to enter the rake and found a fore and aft 6 to 12 inch gash about 12 feet long on the port side of the rake. The attached photo is of the PINEY POINT at 0930 hours of 30 November, 05. [SEP] The PINEY POINT remains aground and stable 100 yards down river from the James River marker # 157. Port tank #1 is reported to be half-full of solidified asphalt and water. No additional product has been reported released from Port tank #1 since noon yesterday 28 Nov. The solidified asphalt in port tank #1 is reported to have sealed the damage. No sheen was observed from around the barge and over the mound of solidified product. No release of product has been reported from any of the other tanks on the barge. The front rake of the PINEY POINT is flooded. The potential of 1500 bbls of asphalt material that may have been released has solidified as it came out of the barge. The product that was released now lays under the barge and along the port side of the barge in a mound as deep as 7 feet. This mound of product was identified by sounding with a pole. The MSDS (#209) received from Valero Energy Corporation, One Valero Place San Antonio, TX, 78221, 713-923 -6641 24 hr and 337-566-0116 general assistance), identifies the product as "Asphalt Cement AC-5" with a melting point of >135 F, with "negligible" solubility, and "negligible" volatility. [SEP] BARGE PINEY POINT, RICHMOND, VA 1230 EST, Monday November 28, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (11/28): 1653 Sunrise (11/29): 0703 Sunset (11/29): 1652 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the S to SE at 10-15 knots with gust to 22 knots. Tuesday, the winds are forecast to be from the S at 15-20 knots shifting in the afternoon with the passage of a cold front to be from the NW at 10-15 knots. Waves: Today through Tuesday, light chop of 1-2 feet on the river. Precipitation: Today through Tonight, chance of showers in the region with a chance of a isolated thunderstorm. Tuesday, showers are expected in the region. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tonight, overcast skies are forecast. Tuesday, cloudy skies are expected. Temperatures: Today through Tuesday, the high is expected to be in the low 60???€?s and the low in the upper 40???€?s. Extended Forecast - Days 3-5: Wednesday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Clear skies. Dry. Thursday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Clear skies. Dry. Friday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Clear skies. Dry. [SEP] Overview photo of PINEY POINT on Monday, 28 November, on the James River. [SEP] It's the first day, there is a lot of things that we do not know. Information that we have recently obtained is: - The damaged tank on the PINEY POINT is #1 port with a capacity of 3024 bbls. - The amount lost from that tank is not known. Will not know how much was lost until it is sounded, and that is not today. - The material was being transported in a heated barge at 280 degrees F - Temperature drop in the barge is reported to be 2 degrees per hour since the heating elements have been shut down. - On-scene observations is that the hot material, when it cooled, was thought to be "chunky" as opposed to "gooey." - Operators from the terminal were of the opinion that the asphalt material would stay in the same area in which it was spilled. They may have provided this opinion based on some experience with local spills in the James River - unknown. - There will be a "clam shell" brought in to remove the cooled asphalt from the bottom at the scene of the grounding. - The experienced Coast Guard responder that is on-scene and has seen the oil enter the water is of the opinion that the asphalt material that is on the bottom will stay close to the area where it was spilled. Future Considerations Requiring More Information: - What is the probability of some of this cooled asphalt impacting the Surry Nuclear Power Plant at Hogg Island at 37-09' and 76-40' 30" ? What is the theoretical spread of the asphalt? More observations of the oil's spreading and state will be provided tomorrow on the second day of the spill - Tuesday 29 Nov. [SEP] BARGE PINEY POINT, RICHMOND, VA 1130 EST, Thursday December 1, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (12/01): 1651 Sunrise (12/02): 0706 Sunset (12/02): 1650 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Friday, the winds are predicted to be from the W at 10-15 knots. Waves: Tonight through Friday, calm to a light chop on the river. Precipitation: Today through Friday, no precipitation is expected in the region. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, partly cloudy skies are expected. Temperatures: Today, the high is expected to be near 50 and the low in the low 30???€?s. Friday, the high is predicted to be near 50 with a low in the low 20???€?s. Extended Forecast - Days 3-5: Saturday, W-SW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Cloudy skies with a rain likely. Sunday, W-SW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Cloudy skies with a chance of rain. Monday, W winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of rain. [SEP] Tidal Currents [SEP] I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 13:53 EST on November 28, 2005. Information in the report is based on a barge, Piney Point, towed by tug Barbary Coast grounding near 37??24.2???€? N and 77??23.6???€? W near Kingsland Reach, Virginia. The barge has 22,000 bbls of heated asphalt onboard. Releases from five source points totaling hundreds of gallons have been reported. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report is the James River within 10 miles of the grounding location. This area does
On 11/21/05 at 0730 local time the T/V Sperchious grounded on the south coast of Puerto Rico, outside Bahia de Guayanilla. The vessel is not leaking at this time. The vessel has a cargo of 50K metric tons or 13.4M gallons of #6 fuel oil. [SEP] Weather for T/V Sperchious, Off Guayanilla, P.R. 1300 AST, Monday, November 21, 2005 Sunset (11/21): 1749 AST Sunrise (11/22): 0636 Sunset (11/22): 1749 _________________________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Monday afternoon: Light winds from the ENE estimated to be less than 10 knots Monday night: Decreasing winds becoming variable by Tuesday Tuesday: Light and variable winds with possible onshore sea breeze developing Wednesday: Light and variable winds __________________________________________________ Combined Seas: Monday: 1-3 feet for outer coastal waters Tuesday: 1 - 2 feet for outer coastal waters Wednesday AM: 1 - 2 feet increasing late Wednesday night __________________________________________________ Precipitation: Monday: cldy with light rain off an on Tuesday: Light showers with minimal accumulation ___________________________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tuesday, clear to partly cloudy skies are predicted. ___________________________________________________ Temperature: Monday high : upper 80's Monday low : mid 70's ___________________________________________________ Extended Forecast: There is a high degree of uncertainty in the extended forecast. A low pressure system coming off the SE US mainland is expect to reach the Dominican Republic/Haiti on late Wednesday or Thursday and stall out. If this holds then the light winds and calm seas will continue for Puerto Rico for Thursday and Friday. However, there is a possiblity that the low pressure would continue east and impact Puerto Rico. Nevertheless, on late Thursday and into Friday swells are expected to significantly increase offshore to 7-9 feet from the NE. The area of the grounded tanker is protected from the NE swells however some increase of the seas will be noticed. [SEP] See attached [SEP] Vessel Photo Port Side [SEP] Photo: Vessel Refloated [SEP] On Friday (11/25) the NOAA SSC will meet with the PR underwater archeologist and Department of Natural Resources reps to perform an underwater survey of the impact area to serve as a pre- assessment for potential NRDA actvities. [SEP] Evening Report 25 November 2005 This morning the NOAA SSC met with representatives of the PR DNRA, EQB, underwater archeologist, and rangers to conduct an underwater survey of the grounding site. After several attempts we were able to locate the position of the ship where it was sitting on the bottom. We marked an area approximately 600???€? X 75???€? (17?? 57.613???€? N / 066?? 46.138???€? W & 17?? 57.524???€? N / 066?? 46.122???€? W). Preliminary survey indicates the area was flattened by the tanker and was not as barren as first surmised. The bottom had spur and groove bottom topography that was fairly level. There was evidence of a benthic community consisting of hard coral (brain and staghorn), soft coral, sea fans, sponges, and algae on the bottom. The DNRA staked the area and took some initial photographs. They plan to return next week to do a more in-depth survey. The site is in approximately 30 (+/-) feet of water. The local NOAA NMFS Enforcement officer has been notified. The impact site is within three nautical miles of the coast (within state territorial waters). From this initial survey it appears that the DNRA should have the lead on any damage assessment and NOAA should be available to support this assessment as necessary. During a morning conference call with the USCG and all interested parties the COTP announced that the vessel was cleared to depart since the bottom survey showed no significant damage. All boom will be removed from the water today. The investigation into the cause of the incident continues. [SEP] On 11/21/05 at 0730 local time the T/V Sperchious grounded on the south coast of Puerto Rico, outside Bahia de Guayanilla, 17deg 57.64min N, 066deg 46.10min W. The vessel is not leaking at this time. The vessel has a cargo of 50K metric tons or 13.4M gallons of #6 fuel oil. The USCG is working with the vessel owner to implement a lightering plan and refloat the vessel. [SEP] T/V SPERCHIOUS, Off GUAYANILLA, P.R. 1330 AST, Wednesday, November 23, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (11/23): 1749 AST Sunrise (11/24): 0637 Sunset (11/24) : 1749 _________________________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Wednesday afternoon, NE winds at 5-10 knots are forecast with the possibility of S winds at 5-10 knots due to afternoon sea breeze. Wednesday Night: NE winds at 5-10 knots. Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 5-10 knots. __________________________________________________ Combined Seas: Today, the seas are forecast to 2-3 feet. Thursday, seas are expected to be 3 - 4 feet. __________________________________________________ Precipitation: Wednesday, isolated showers, possible thunderstorms in the late afternoon or evening. Thursday, isolated showers with possible thundershowers in afternoon hours. ___________________________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Unlimited visibility except during periods of showers. ___________________________________________________ Temperature: Wednesday through Thursday, the high is forecast to be in the upper 80's with the low in the mid 70???€?s. ___________________________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday morning the winds are expected to be from the NE at 5-10 knots with the wind speed increasing in the afternoon to 10-15 knots. Seas, are predicted to be 3-5 feet. Saturday, winds are expected to be from the NE at 15-20 knots. Seas 4-5 feet. Sunday, winds are forecast to be from the NE at 15-20 knots. Seas 4-5 feet. [SEP] Photo:Sperchios Bow [SEP] Tank Vessel Sperchios aground with tugs attached during refloat operations on 23 November 2005. [SEP] See attached pdf [SEP] Weather for T/V Sperchious, Off Guayanilla, P.R. 0230 AST, Tuesday, November 22, 2005 Site specific forecast generated by NWS San Juan, Pr.  Sunrise (11/22): 0636 Sunset (11/22): 1749 _________________________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Tuesday AM : Light and variable winds Tuesday PM : SE winds at 5-10 knots due to afternoon sea breeze Tuesday Night : Light and variable winds Wednesday AM: Light and variable winds Wednesday PM: SE winds at 5-10 knots due to afternoon sea breeze Wednesday Night: NE winds at 5 - 10 knots __________________________________________________ Combined Seas: Tuesday: 1 - 2 feet Wednesday: 1 - 2 feet __________________________________________________ Precipitation: Tuesday: Isolated light showers Wednesday: Isolated light showers ___________________________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Unlimited visibility except during periods of showers ___________________________________________________ Temperature: Tuesday high : upper 80's Tuesday low : low 70's ___________________________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday : NE winds 5 -10 knots Friday : ENE winds 10 - 15 knots with increasing swells late Thursday and into Friday.
Sector Portland reported that at approximately 1400 Friday November 11 the 60 foot crabbing vessel F/V Bold Contender was floating upside down about 2 nm offshore of Depoe Bay at Cape Foulweather with a potential of 6000 gallons of diesel and 300 gallons of hydraulic oil onboard. [SEP] Sector Portland reported that at approximately 1400 Friday November 11 the 60 foot crabbing vessel F/ V Bold Contender was floating upside down about 2 nm offshore of Depoe Bay at Cape Foulweather with a potential of 6000 gallons of diesel and 300 gallons of hydraulic oil onboard. Reported coordinates were 44 45.98 N and 124 07.0 W. A light sheen was observed in the vicinity of the vessel. Based on the weather forecast, NOAA ORR estimated that the vessel, if it remained afloat, would ground to the north somewhere between Cascade Head and Cape Lookout before noon on Saturday November 12. Model results indicated all but approximately 15% of the diesel fuel would evaporate and disperse within 4 hours of a catastrophic release under current weather conditions. [SEP] A USCG overflight at first light on Saturday morning 11/12 indicated the vessel F/V Bold Contender sank offshore some time during the night, leaving behind a small debris field. [SEP] A hotline has been opened to capture information related to the FV Bold Contender, Offshore Lincoln City, OR incident.
On 11 November 2005, an Integrated Tug/Barge System -ITB DBL 152 and the T/V REBEL- allided with an unknown submerged obstruction approximately 32 miles offshore of the Western Louisiana Coast.  The obstruction, apparently, was a rig owned by Dynegy that had been toppled during Hurricane Rita.  The barge was holed on the starboard bow.  The hole was reported to be 30' x 5' and an estimated 7,200 bbls of #6 oil was lost from #1 Starboard Storage Tank. [SEP] Traj Update -surface and mid-depth [SEP] T/B DBL 152 listing with bow awash on November 11 (USCG Photo) [SEP] 20 July 06 Survey (moderate) [SEP] NOAA and other agencies used meteorological and oceanographic data from this Texas Automated Buoy System (TABS) to enhance forecasts and predict subsurface oil movement. The barge Mr. 2Hooks is in the background. Subsurface oil recovery operations were conducted from this barge. Photo Credit: NOAA [SEP] -- CJ Beegle-Krause, Ph.D. NOAA/NOS/ORR/Hazmat 7600 Sand Point Way NE Seattle, WA 98115 voice: (206) 526-6961 fax: (206) 526-6329 <:}}}}}>< <:}}}}}>< \!/ \!/ \!/ >^<**>^< \!/ \!/ \!/ [SEP] This graphic shows early reports from the field. the snare-baited traps have remained in place since 05 Dec. (5 days) and weathered seas heavy enough to prevent lightering or searching. [SEP] Frame grab from the video of the submerged oil in the scour trench at the eastern end of the scour trench [SEP] Situation Update 01 January 2006 Recovery and discovery operations continue. The heaviest concentrations of oil observed thus far are in the vicinity of the pipeline located about 1 ?? NM west of the former barge location, although exhaustive surveys have yet to be completed further west and east of this location. Diver assisted recovery has led to the collection of approximately 1900 Bbls of oil as of 1300 01/01/06. The process is slow and involves two divers using shop vac hose attachments, crawling along the bottom, and sucking in the oil while controlling flow with a quarter turn ball valve. Very little sediment and relatively little water is collected using this method. However, a diver can expect to only cover about 100 square feet of oiled bottom in an hour on the bottom. There is on average one diver down at a time. Visibility has been low and has limited ROV operation efficiency and effectiveness. The bottom seems to be stirred up and in motion even with low surface activity (3ft 7sec swells). As a result of this motion, oil mats appear to be breaking into smaller snake like pieces aligned with the bottom sand ripples (see FTP:// video from 12-31). Finding another, more capable ROV is ongoing. The long term monitoring plan has been implemented. Snare filled crab pots are being deployed and checked in accordance with the plan agreed to by the unified command. No hits have been observed beyond those previously reported (seven miles west). NOAA Fisheries has issued a fishery advisory for the area. This advisory remains in effect. Several shrimping boats have been observed within the safety zone over the past few days. A side scan sonar will re-arrive on scene tomorrow. Its primary purpose will be to map the debris field where the barge salvage operations occurred. Its secondary purpose will be to investigate its oil detection abilities and possibly map out the distribution field. A test is planned. NOAA Personnel On Scene: Demian Bailey (out on 02 January CJ Beegle-Krause (in 01 January) [SEP] V-SOR trackline data are from 23-25 Nov. Dive locations are from 30 Nov. [SEP] Map of the actual tracks of the snare drags/V-SORS surveys around the barge, color-coded to indicate the relative amount of oil coverage on the snare. The divers confirmed extensive amounts of oil in the areas bounded by the red lines 0.25-0.5 nm west of the barge. Today, divers are conducting surveys/video of the areas further to the NW, W, and SW, in areas that had from less than 1% to 3-50% on the snare drags. [SEP] 20 July 06 Survey (heavy) [SEP] -- CJ Beegle-Krause, Ph.D. NOAA/NOS/ORR/Hazmat 7600 Sand Point Way NE Seattle, WA 98115 voice: (206) 526-6961 fax: (206) 526-6329 <:}}}}}>< <:}}}}}>< \!/ \!/ \!/ >^<**>^< \!/ \!/ \!/
On November 6 a citizen reported observing pools of mercury in the surf zone on the beach approximately one half mile north of the jetty at the Siuslaw River entrance.  Approximate dimensions reported were 3 x 11 feet.  A sample was collected by the citizen and later confirmed to be mercury after analysis by NRC. An extensive survey was conducted of the location where the citizen reported the mercury but no mercury was found. [SEP] The shoreline area in Florence, Oregon where mercury pools had been reported by a citizen on Sunday was surveyed again today for any indication of mercury contamination. Pits dug along a survey grid in the area were examined visually and monitored with a Jerome mercury vapor analyzer. No mercury was detected. Sand samples from the immediate area were collected for laboratory chemical analysis. All contaminated sand collected by the cleanup crew yesterday was found in the upland dune, where a sample of the mercury collected in the surf zone by the reporting citizen on Sunday had been carried and later spilled. Unable to find any indication of remaining mercury contamination after two days of surveying and monitoring during the low tide, the Unified Command reopened the beach and demobilized the command post by the end of the day. NOAA personnel on-scene (departing Wednesday morning): Ruth Yender, Scientific Support Coordinator Jim Farr, Chemist [SEP] A hotline has been opened for a mercury release near Florence on the central Oregon coast. [SEP] On November 6, 2005 a citizen reported observing pools of mercury in the surf zone on the beach approximately one half mile north of the jetty at the Siuslaw River entrance. Approximate dimensions reported were 3 x 11 feet. A sample was collected and later confirmed to be mercury after analysis by NRC. The area suspected of being contaminated has been cordoned off. Eight pounds of contaminated sand were removed by environmental cleanup crews on Monday. Dilineation of the contaminated area and cleanup efforts will continue Tuesday. The source and amount of mercury in the contaminated area remain unknown at this time. A Command Post has been established at U.S. Coast Guard Station Siuslaw River in Florence. NOAA personnel on-scene: Ruth Yender Jim Farr
In 2005, Hurricanes Katrina and Rita littered the Louisiana coastal zone with tens of thousands of drums, cylinders, aboveground storage tanks, and other containers that contained crude oil, refined petroleum products, chemicals, and other hazardous materials.  The EPA and United States Coast Guard (USCG) conducted the response action jointly in direct support to the State of Louisiana under ESF-10.  NOAA was requested to provide the role of the Scientific Support Coordinator and coordinated the Environmental Unit functions for the Incident Command. [SEP] Crushed Tank located in St. Bernard Parrish by Helo Team 1 Allison [SEP] Tank displaced in marsh [SEP] Photo of 350-gal "tote" at location indicated on photo. These stainless steel totes are used for storing and transporting various liquids including fuels and non-toxic substances. Recon has indicated that there are hundreds of these totes in the surveyed wetlands. [SEP] Crushed Tank in marsh located by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher [SEP] Displaced Tank in marsh located by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher [SEP] Best Practices Guide - Marsh Buggy Operations [SEP] Crushed tanks at damaged facility located by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher [SEP] Best Practice Guide - Wrack [SEP] Cylinder located in marsh by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher [SEP] Crushed Tank located by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher [SEP] 55 gal drum located by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher [SEP] Cylinder in Marsh located by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher
NOAA Hazmat requested to post NHC forecast hurricane Wilma tracks to hotline [SEP] HURRICANE WILMA DISCUSSION NUMBER 34...CORRECTED NWS TPC/NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER MIAMI FL 5 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2005  ...CORRECTED SECOND PARAGRAPH...RAPID INTENSIFICATION APPEARS LESS LIKELY THAN GRADUAL INTENSIFICATION...  WILMA CONTINUES TO GRADUALLY ACCELERATE ALONG A NORTHEASTWARD HEADING...WITH CURRENT SPEED OF ABOUT 12 KT...AND IT WILL PROBABLY BE MOVING TWICE AS FAST BY THE TIME IT REACHES THE ATLANTIC OCEAN OFF THE EAST COAST OF FLORIDA IN ABOUT 24 HOURS. THE MID- TO UPPER-LEVEL LOW OVER THE MIDWESTERN STATES IS PROGRESSING TO THE EAST AS THE MODELS HAVE BEEN FORECASTING... AND IT SHOULD REACH THE GREAT LAKES TOMORROW. MEANWHILE AN ASSOCIATED TROUGH OVER THE SOUTHEASTERN UNITED STATES WILL DEEPEN AND ENHANCE THE WESTERLIES OVER THE GULF OF MEXICO...BRINGING WILMA OVER FLORIDA. THE DYNAMICAL MODELS ARE IN EVEN TIGHTER AGREEMENT NOW THAT THIS PATTERN WILL FORCE THE CENTER OF WILMA TO CROSS THE SOUTHERN FLORIDA PENINSULA... BUT THERE IS STILL SOME SPREAD IN THE TIMING. HOWEVER... THE SPEED OF THE DYNAMICAL MODEL CONSENSUS HAS NOT CHANGED MUCH. AS A RESULT... THE NEW OFFICIAL TRACK FORECAST IS ESSENTIALLY JUST AN UPDATE OF THE PREVIOUS ADVISORY...BRINGING THE CENTER TO THE COAST EARLY MONDAY MORNING. DESPITE THE GOOD AGREEMENT AMONG THE MODELS ON WHERE WILMA WILL GO...IT REMAINS IMPORTANT TO STRESS THAT ONE SHOULD NOT FOCUS ON THE EXACT FORECAST TRACK SINCE WILMA HAS A LARGE AND EXPANDING WIND FIELD... AND SIGNIFICANT IMPACTS WILL LIKELY BE FELT WELL AWAY FROM THE CENTER.  BOTH AIR FORCE AND NOAA HURRICANE HUNTER AIRCRAFT HAVE BEEN PROVIDING DATA FROM WILMA THIS AFTERNOON... AND THE CENTRAL PRESSURE HAS BEEN GRADUALLY FALLING... MOST RECENTLY TO 959 MB. GIVEN THE LOWERING PRESSURE... SFMR WINDS AS STRONG AS 87 KT... AND FLIGHT LEVEL WINDS NEAR 100 KT... THE ADVISORY INTENSITY IS INCREASED TO 90 KT. IT APPEARS THAT WIND SHEAR WILL REMAIN WEAK ENOUGH TO ALLOW FOR SOME GRADUAL ADDITIONAL INTENSIFICATION UP UNTIL LANDFALL... AS SUGGESTED BY THE GFDL MODEL. RAPID INTENSIFICATION SEEMS LESS LIKELY GIVEN THE RATHER LARGE SIZE OF THE EYE AND A LACK OF TIME FOR IT TO CONTRACT BEFORE LANDFALL IN FLORIDA. THE SHIPS GUIDANCE CONTINUES TO FORECAST A STEADY WEAKENING UNTIL LANDFALL DUE TO INCREASING SHEAR. HOWEVER... SATELLITE IMAGERY DOES NOT REVEAL ANY OBVIOUS SIGNS THAT THE SHEAR IS YET STRONG ENOUGH TO REVERSE THE CURRENT STRENGTHENING TREND...AND IT MIGHT NOT INCREASE IN TIME TO INDUCE A WEAKENING TREND BEFORE LANDFALL. THE BEST ESTIMATE OF LANDFALL INTENSITY IS CATEGORY TWO...BUT IT IS POSSIBLE THAT WILMA COULD BE NEAR CATEGORY THREE INTENSITY AS IT APPROACHES THE COAST. [SEP] More info about the Hurricane forecast can be found at:  http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/index.shtml?  NHC forecast tracks of the center can be in error; the average track forecast errors in recent years was used to construct the areas of uncertainty for the 3 days (solid white area). There is also uncertainty in the NHC intensity forecasts. The intensity forecast chart and table provide intensity forecast and intensity forecast uncertainty information.  This display shows an approximate representation of coastal areas under a hurricane warning (red), hurricane watch (pink), tropical storm warning (blue) and tropical storm watch (yellow). The orange circle indicates the current position of the center of the tropical cyclone. The black line and dots show the National Hurricane Center (NHC) forecast track of the center at the times indicated. The letter inside the dot indicates the NHC's forecast intensity for that time.  It is also important to realize that a tropical cyclone is not a point. Their effects can span many hundreds of miles from the center. The area experiencing hurricane force (one-minute average wind speeds of at least 74 mph) and tropical storm force (one-minute average wind speeds of 39-73 mph) winds can extend well beyond the white areas shown enclosing the most likely track area of the center. [SEP] Trajectory from the national Hurricane Center [SEP] NHC forecast tracks of the center can be in error; the average track forecast errors in recent years was used to construct the areas of uncertainty for the 3 days (solid white area). There is also uncertainty in the NHC intensity forecasts. The intensity forecast chart and table provide intensity forecast and intensity forecast uncertainty information.  This display shows an approximate representation of coastal areas under a hurricane warning (red), hurricane watch (pink), tropical storm warning (blue) and tropical storm watch (yellow). The orange circle indicates the current position of the center of the tropical cyclone. The black line and dots show the National Hurricane Center (NHC) forecast track of the center at the times indicated. The letter inside the dot indicates the NHC's forecast intensity for that time.  It is also important to realize that a tropical cyclone is not a point. Their effects can span many hundreds of miles from the center. The area experiencing hurricane force (one-minute average wind speeds of at least 74 mph) and tropical storm force (one-minute average wind speeds of 39-73 mph) winds can extend well beyond the white areas shown enclosing the most likely track area of the center.
The SSC was contacted Oct 17 at 1100 am concerning an mystery slick on the Maumee River In Toledo, Ohio. The oil appeared to be waste oil and was seen floating between the Martin Luther King Bridge and the I 280 Bridge. The volume was estimated to be between 500 - 5000 gallons. Early reports indicated no shoreline or wildlife impacts, although there were reports of oiled vessels. The oil did not match any vessels in the area during the spill. A sewer outfall on the eastern shore near the MLK bridge was indicated as a possible source. An overflight showed heavy sheens and free product from the MLK bridge to the CSX railroad bridge. Scattered pockets of oil were seen on both banks. Shoreline impacts seem to be mostly in areas of riprap. A marina south of the MLK bridge on the east bank acted as a natural collection point. There were no known impacts to wildlife. A local clean up contractor recovered oil along an area of riprap. [SEP] Oct. 18 Yesterday's overflight showed heavy sheens and free product from the MLK bridge to the CSX railroad bridge. Scattered pockets of oil were seen on both banks. Shoreline impacts seem to be mostly in areas of riprap. A marina south of the MLK bridge on the east bank acted as a natural collection point. An overflight was planned for the morning (10/18). There are no known impacts to wildlife. A local clean up contractor is recovering oil along an area of riprap. The source may be a oil tank for a boiler at a local hockey rink. The oil may have leaked from the piping and migrated through the sanitary sewer to the river. No further NOAA support is required at this time. [SEP] A hotline has been started for a mystery spill in the lower Maumee River near Toledo, Ohio. [SEP] MYSTERY SPILL, MAUMEE RIVER, TOLEDO, OH 1200 CDT, Monday October 17, 2005 Sunset (10/17): 1750 Sunrise (10/18): 0649 Sunset (10/18): 1749 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the SW at 10-15 knots. Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the W at 5-10 knots. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tonight, showers are forecast in the region. Tuesday, no precipitation is expected. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tonight, partly cloudy skies are expected. Tuesday, mostly sunny skies are expected. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the mid 60???€?s to lows in the upper 40???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, W winds at 5-10. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of showers. Thursday, SW to W winds at 5-10. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of showers in the afternoon. Friday, SW to W winds at 10-15. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of showers. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Maumee River Mystery Spill, Toledo, OH. I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 0200 (EST/EDT) on 10/17/05. Information in the report is based on a spill of approximately 500 to 5,000 gallons of unknown product (reported as sheen) released in the Maumee River between the I-280 and Martin Luther King, Jr. Bridge, approximately 3 miles above its confluence with Lake Erie. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report includes the Maumee River, from the Martin Luther King, Jr. Bridge to the confluence of the river and Lake Erie, and Maumee Bay in Lake Erie from the Ohio/Michigan border east to South Shore Park. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline along the Maumee River is highly developed and is composed primarily of riprap, solid man-made structures, and shelving bedrock shores. Grassy Island and the soil disposal areas adjacent to the mouth of the river, as well as the Bay shoreline to the northwest of the river mouth, are also primarily riprap and solid man-made structures. A few small wetland areas are present near the mouth of river, primarily in Otter Creek and behind Bay View Park. There are a few, small, sand beaches backed with low banks interspersed with riprap and solid man-made structures in the eastern portion of Maumee Bay. The small islands in Maumee Bay along the ship channel are shelving bedrock shores backed by mixed sand-and-gravel beaches. The most sensitive habitats in the area are wetlands, which are often highly productive, serving as important wildlife habitat and nursery areas for fish. Marsh vegetation can experience severe stress or mortality if it becomes oiled, especially if oil penetrates or becomes mixed into the sediments. Where wetland sediments are muddy and soft, it is important to prevent excessive disturbance and further mixing of oil into the substrate by foot traffic during cleanup activities, as this could result in more severe and long-term impacts to the marshes. In general, gasoline, diesel or other lighter products form thin slicks and are unlikely to accumulate in large amounts against the shoreline. Heavier or more persistent oil may adhere to piers or other harbor structures and penetrate between riprap boulders. Chronic sheening problems are possible for riprap and other permeable manmade shoreline types, especially in sheltered areas. On sandy beaches, burial of oil is possible, but penetration is unlikely. Penetration is possible on sand-and-gravel beaches. Depending on the stickiness of the oil, it is possible that it may also adhere to surfaces on exposed, shelving bedrock shores. IV. Biological Resources at Risk Fish Several species of commercial and recreational value may be present in the Maumee River and western Lake Erie, including: alewife, chinook and coho salmon, rainbow smelt, brown trout, northern pike, bluegill, white crappie, black crappie, yellow perch, largemouth and smallmouth bass, rock bass, pumpkinseed, walleye, white bass, channel catfish, brook trout (state threatened), fathead minnow, shorthead redhorse, white sucker, brown bullhead, green sunfish, grass pickerel, sauger, freshwater drum, and lake sturgeon (state threatened). Acute toxicity to water column organisms may be possible, particularly for gasoline, diesel or other lighter products with larger proportions of water-soluble components. Larval and juvenile fish inhabiting shallow waters, or wetland areas could be the most vulnerable to spill impacts. Birds Several species of shorebirds, wading birds, diving birds, waterfowl, raptors, gulls and terns are present throughout the area during the fall. State listed birds that may be present in the area include peregrine falcon (state endangered), bald eagle (state endangered, federally threatened) American bittern (state endangered), least bittern (state threatened), black-crowned night heron (state threatened), great egret (state species of concern), king rail (state endangered), Virginia rail (state species of concern), sora rail (state species of concern), and upland sandpiper (state threatened). Waterfowl may be in fall migration at this time of year, and may be passing through the area. Concentrations of herring and ring-billed gulls, and common terns (state endangered) are typically present in the spoil disposal areas near the mouth of the river during the spring and summer and may remain in the area. Waterfowl are usually at high risk during oil spills because they spend nearly all their time on the water surface. Wading birds, gulls, terns, and raptors can also be severely impacted by oil in some cases. Waterfowl and wading birds may be directly oiled and can become oiled on the upper body and feathers by coming in contact with oiled vegetation or wrack. Direct oiling of birds reduces the buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by feathers, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Preening of oiled feathers may also result in ingestion of oil resulting in irritation, sickness, or death. Bird oiling, particularly waterfowl and wading birds, may continue even after the floating oil slicks have been removed, depending on the extent of oiled vegetation. Mammals Muskrats may be present in wetland habitats throughout the area. These species can be severely impacted by swimming through oil slicks or contacting oiled marsh vegetation. Matting of the fur due to oiling results in impacts similar to those described for birds. Grooming of contaminated fur can also result in sickness or death depending on the amount of oil ingested. V. Human-Use Resources at Risk The coast of Lake Erie is a high-use recreational area. Activities include use of recreational beaches, fishing, hunting, boating, and other water activities. Several boat ramps, marinas, and hoists occur in the Maumee River and near the river mouth. [SEP] Date: 1330 EDT October 17, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Richard Wingrove FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery Spill, Maumee River, Toledo, OH FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a mystery spill in the Maumee River. These notes are based on the following information: At 0845 EDT today, a mystery spill estimated to be 500-5,000 gallons was reported on the Maumee River in Toledo OH. The oil is presumed to be waste oil and is
Union Pacific Tank Battery [SEP] Oil released from sediments after light disturbance [SEP] On 9/27/05, shortly after the passing of Hurricane Rita, the US Coast Guard and the Texas General Land Office began responding to a mystery oil spill on the north side of Galveston Island near the Pelican Island Bridge. The area had been subject to mystery spills before, but not to the point where cleanup was initiated. The responders cleaned approximately 200 yards of shoreline along the southern end of the bridge and the small cove south of the spill site. Three dead oiled birds were collected. Responders estimated that the spill consisted of 2-5 barrels of oil fresh oil and noted an equivalent amount of weathered oil that had stained the rip-rap along the shoreline. After the initial gross oil was removed, the responders noticed heavy staining of sediments in the intertidal, small tarballs surfacing and spreading into sheens, and oil oozing from the shoreline. Upon further inspection, the TGLO and USCG noticed heavy asphalt pavement in the area, both above and below the high tide line. The TGLO suspected that Hurricane Rita may have eroded the shoreline and exposed a historic spill site or industrial operation, and began researching the industrial history of the site. The bridge was built in the 50???€?s. The 1-2 acre parcel of land to the west of the bridge was isolated by the bridge construction. The site is owned by Union Pacific Railroad. The railroad initial had larger holdings in the area but sold them, and reported believed they had also sold the shoreside parcel. However, TGLO determined that UP continues to own the site and has been paying the taxes. TGLO and USCG both consider UP to be the responsible party for the site and UP unhappily has accepted preliminary responsibility for the cleanup and site investigation. The USCG initially opened the pollution response under Hurricane Rita ESF-10 funding, but has now notified the RP that the case will be pursued under OPA since the hurricane did not cause the spill but just exposed the incident. The TGLO found that the site was used as a shipyard during World War II, under the name Kane Shipping. At that time, the site had a small tank battery of fuel oil tanks. The TGLO believes that shoreline erosion from Hurricane Rita has exposed the historic footprint of at least one of these tanks. No tanks are present at the site now, but circular depressions are visible. The USCG requested NOAA???€?s assistance in determining how far to clean the site. Additionally, the USCG would like assistance in reviewing and overseeing the RP???€?s site investigation. Thus far, the site investigation has been very preliminary. The RP???€?s consultants have dug multiple cores for visual inspection. Oil has been found up to 5 feet below the surface. This initial scoping effort will be used to design a more thorough investigation. The TGLO has requested that meeting with the RP be held at 11:00 am on Friday, October 14, at the USCG Marine Safety Unit in Galveston to discuss further steps at the site. NOAA is invited and encouraged to participate. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Shoreline oiling from overturned rip-rap [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the leaking tank at Union Pacific Tank Battery, Pelican Island, Galveston, TX. [SEP] Historic map of tank area overlay on current shoreline- From TGLO [SEP] Eroding layer of heavily weathered oil/asphalt under suspected tank site. Chunks of this material resemble road asphalt, but in some areas thick oozing oil can be seen
On October 3, 2005, a fatal crash between a SUV and gasoline tank truck on theSeven Mile Bridge near Marathon, FL, resulted in a large fire and release ofgasoline and fire fighting foam into the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary. The burning fuel truck was extinguished using Aqueous Fire Fighting Foam(AFFF).  NOAA HAZMAT was requested to provide information on the potential fateof the spilled gasoline and AFFF.  Given the relatively small volumes involved,we believe that discernible impacts are unlikely.  However, recent concernsregarding the environmental impacts from AFFF suggest that sampling of bivalvesand corals adjacent to the bridge might be prudent.  See Biological concerns report posted to hotline for more details. [SEP] A hotline has been opened for the October 3, 2005, gasoline tank truck accident on the Seven Mile Bridge near Marathon, FL. The accident resulted in a large fire and release of gasoline and fire fighting foam into the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary [SEP] Gasoline Tank Truck Accident- 7 Mile Bridge, Florida Keys. Summary: On October 3, 2005, a fatal crash between a SUV and gasoline tank truck on the Seven Mile Bridge near Marathon, FL, resulted in a large fire and release of gasoline and fire fighting foam into the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary. The burning fuel truck was extinguished using Aqueous Fire Fighting Foam (AFFF). NOAA HAZMAT was requested to provide information on the potential fate of the spilled gasoline and AFFF. Given the relatively small volumes involved, we believe that discernible impacts are unlikely. However, recent concerns regarding the environmental impacts from AFFF suggest that sampling of bivalves and corals adjacent to the bridge might be prudent. Background The situation as described by the USCG and FDEP suggest that relatively small amounts of unburned gasoline entered the waterway during this incident. Reportedly, 35 gallons of the firefighting agent AFFF were expended in extinguishing the fire. The most water soluble fractions (WSFs) of gasoline are the monoaromatic hydrocarbons, and include benzene, toluene and the xylene isomers. These are all in significant concentration in gasoline. However, these compounds have high vapor pressures and are likely to pose no major contamination problems in the water column. Studies at the Naval Supply Station Laboratory, Calif. have shown benzene/toluene concentrations in saltwater over a 24 hour period to be less than 1mg/L (1ppm) for both contaminants. Observations from the scene of this incident suggest that very little gasoline entered the saltwater environment; hence???€?based on this information???€?we believe the environmental consequences of the gasoline release will be minimal. Personnel from NAS Key West were reported to have used 35 gallons of AFFF foam to fight the fire. AFFF has been the primary firefighting agent used in aviation settings. However, concerns about "PBT," or persistence, bioaccumulation, and toxicity led the 3M Corporation, a major producer of AFFF, to announce in 2000 that it intended to cease manufacture of these and other fluorocarbon-based surfactant products. The specific chemical of environmental concern is the product of biological degradation of AFFF constituents called perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS). PFOS is persistent and is not known to degrade under natural conditions, and it has been shown to bioaccumulate. A 3M study showed that elevated doses of PFOS administered to adult rats caused toxic reactions in offspring. Low levels of PFOS have been found in fish and birds including those from remote oceanic locations. Use of PFOS precursors has been so widespread, and the chemical is so persistent that every person in the U.S. may be carrying low levels in his/her body. Human toxicology studies show that PFOS is absorbed orally and then distributes in serum and in the liver. Human toxic levels are believed to manifest themselves at concentrations two orders of magnitude higher than exposed 3M workers and four orders of magnitude higher than levels found in the general population; however, toxicity effects of PFOS are considered significant. Although acute environmental toxicity results are few, LC50 concentrations for test organisms like fathead minnow, rainbow trout, bluegill, and water flea fall into a similar range between 200 and 1500 parts per million. Because of the persistence of the degradation products in AFFF, if there are coral reef resources in the immediate vicinity of the incident, it may be prudent to monitor levels of PFOS in the environment to determine if there is any cause for concern or a need for further monitoring.
The U.S. Coast Guard's Marine Safety Unit (MSU) at Morgan City, LA, is responsible for monitoring offshore oil rigs, pipelines, and other infrastructure for hurricane damage that results in oil spills. [SEP] Bathtub ring of oiled vegetation at the Goodrich-Weeks Island facility. [SEP] Forward view inside Air Commander with NOAA observer, Dave Wesley. [SEP] Bayou Carlin [SEP] MSO MORGAN CITY Situation Update 15 OCT 2005 USCG and NOAA conducted an overflight of Gulfport Energy in West Cote Blanche Bay (WCBB), no oil was observed coming from the facility. However, a silver/rainbow sheen was observed approximately 1-2 miles southwest of the WCBB oil and gas field measuring 1.5 to 2 miles long with a streak of black oil measuring 200 yds by 20 yds moving to the southwest. The center of the black oil was located at 29 deg 37.4???€?N, 091 deg 49.0???€?W. An NRC report was filed upon return to Morgan City, NRC#776245. See photos DSC01342.jpg and DSC01345.jpg. Eugene Island 314 (Forest Oil)- an ROV is on scene conducting a survey of the structure. There is obvious gas seepage occurring and the ROV crew is attempting to close the casing valves as they continue the survey. NOAA will make preparations on Sunday to demobilize from MSU Morgan City. All documentation produced by NOAA (files, photos, maps, etc.,) to support MSU Morgan City during the ESF-10 Maritime Pollution Response have been saved to an external hard drive and will be transferred to the NOAA SSC in Baton Rouge. Demobilization Plan for NOAA Personnel: Thumm (NOAA) and Holton (RPI) will depart Monday, 17 OCT. [SEP] Abandoned Vessels - Terrebonne Parish [SEP] Workover Barge Terrebonne Bay [SEP] West Cote Blanche Bay [SEP] #4 Tennessee Gas Pipeline, Cocodrie [SEP] Offshore Overflight 05 OCT 2005 [SEP] 03 OCT MSU Morgan City NOAA Update [SEP] Black oil in streaks extending 1-1/2 to 2 miles. Centered near 28 degrees, 57 minutes, 50.2 seconds N, 90 degrees, 04 minutes, 39.0 seconds W. 3.8 mile x 1 mile silver sheen. [SEP] Offshore Overflight 02 OCT 2005
Vermilion Pipeline Block 255 [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
Contains documents and files related to incidents caused by Hurricane Rita. [SEP] In this photo, a container van hangs off the edge of a damaged bridge. In the background, a mobile drilling unit (MDU) has been moved into the shore by Hurricane Rita. Photo taken 10/03/05 by NOAA. [SEP] Each facility shown as a dot on the attached map has filed a Risk Management Plan. See the related "RMP facility data" record (in "Other Products") for details about each of these facilities, including emergency contact information. [SEP] Lake Calcasieu coastal RAR: Resources at Risk for Louisiana Coast from Calcasieu Lake to White Lake I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 4:00 pm EDT on October 3, 2005. Information in the report is a general overview of the resources in the area. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report is the shoreline from Calcasieu Lake to White Lake. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material This report is not based on any particular product but a general overview of the resources in the area. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The predominant shoreline from Calcesieu Lake to White Lake are sand beaches (including fine, medium-, and coarse-grained, and mixed sand and gravel) backed by marshes. At the eastern end of this section of shoreline the sand beaches have been replaced by exposed tidal flats. All the wetland areas behind the beaches are marshes. The inlets to Calcasieu Lake and Mud Lake are protected by riprap groins. V. Biological Resources at Risk Included are general statements about the effects of oil on the various biological resources. The effects may vary based on the type of contaminant, since the behavior, toxicity, and availability of the material can vary from product to product. Fish - Fish present in the lakes and inland waters include, but are not limited to, Atlantic croaker, bay anchovy (spawning), gulf menhaden, pinfish, red drum (spawning), striped mullet, gray snapper, sheepshead, silver perch, and spotted seatrout (spawning). In the Gulf of Mexico waters gulf sturgeon (federally threatened) may also be present in low concentrations. Juvenile fish are usually present all year. In general, juvenile and larval fish are more sensitive to spilled oil than adults. Fish in shallow water areas are more likely to be impacted, due to the potential for a higher concentration of oil in the water column. Surface slicks usually do not have much of an impact on fish. Shellfish - Shellfish present in the area include blue crab, brown shrimp, pink shrimp, white shrimp, and Gulf stone crab. There also low concentrations of bay squid in the lakes and other inland waters. Oyster lease beds are present in Calcasieu Lake. Juvenile stages of all of these shellfish may also be present in the area. Shellfish in shallow water areas are more likely to be impacted, due to the potential for a higher concentration of oil in the water column. Surface slicks usually do not have much of an impact on crabs and shrimp. Crabs, oysters, and other benthic invertebrates may be contaminated by a heavy sinking oil. Birds - October is the beginning of the migratory/overwintering season for waterfowl, so there may be numerous waterfowl in the marshes. Scaup are present in open waters of the lakes and in the nearshore gulf waters. Piping plover (federally threatened) and other shorebirds are on the sand beaches of the gulf shoreline. Wading birds (roseate spoonbill and egrets) may be on some of the shorelines around the lakes. Least terns are also present in the area. Waterfowl are usually at greatest risk during oil spills, because they spend nearly all of their time on the water surface. Waterfowl and wading birds may be directly oiled and can become oiled on the upper body and feathers by coming in contact with oiled vegetation or wrack. Shorebirds usually avoid oil, but may be impacted by loss of feeding areas or intertidal prey, particularly during migration periods. Terns may be at risk because they are often attracted to and will prey on sick or injured prey which may result in oiling of feathers and the ingestion of oil. Oiling of birds reduces the buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by feathers, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Preening of oiled feathers may also result in ingestion of oil causing irritation, sickness, or death. Bird oiling, particularly for waterfowl and wading birds, may continue even after floating oil slicks have been removed, depending on the extent of oiled vegetation. Mammals - Raccoon, mink, muskrat, river otter, and nutria may be found throughout the wetlands and inland waters of this area. As with birds, oiling of these animals may reduce buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by the fur, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Grooming of oiled fur may also result in ingestion of oil causing irritation, sickness, or death. The spilled material may also cause irritation to organs such as the eyes as well as the mucous membranes. Reptiles - American alligator (federally threatened) is found throughout brackish to freshwater marshes. The diamondback terrapin are also in some of the wetland areas. There may be sea turtles in the coastal waters of the Gulf of Mexico. Oil may cause irritation and inflammation of the mucus membranes, especially around the eyes and nostrils, in all of these reptiles. Habitats - There are rare wetland plants throughout the coastal area. Louisiana Natural Heritage Program (Phone: 225-765-2821) can be contacted to obtain exact information on species and location of these plants. VI. Human-Use Resources at Risk Cameron Prairie National Wildlife Refuge is on the south and east sides of Calcasieu Lake. Rockefeller State Wildlife Refuge covers the coastal zone from about 92 55???€? East to 92 30???€? East.. [SEP] MODIS Sept 25, 2005 NOAA Coastwatch [SEP] SLOSH Model run for Hurricane Rita, produced from NHC advisory #25: 4:00pm CDT, Friday, Sept 23, 2005 This image is the result of a run of the SLOSH (Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes) model. SLOSH is a computerized model run by the National Hurricane Center (NHC) to estimate storm surge heights and winds resulting from predicted hurricanes by taking into account Pressure, Size, Forward speed, Track, and Winds. The colors correspond to the maximum predicted elevation of the water surface at each location as the storm passes over the coastline. Perhaps most useful, however, is not the predicted height, but the predicted extent of flooding. The image gives a quick estiime of the area likely to be flooded. These predictions are derived from the latest NHC forecast storm track at the time of the model run. As there is uncertainty in the forecast for the storm track, there is also uncertainty in the estimates for storm surge. The maximum surge could be either to the east or west of the predicted location. For more information about SLOSH, see: http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/HAW2/english/surge/slosh.shtml [SEP] This deck barge was washed ashore into a residential front yard. Photo taken 10/03/05. [SEP] Vaccum operations at the stranded tank in the Texas Wildlife Operations are being conducted while logistics are prepared for a pumping operation that will remove the remaining 60-70K gallons of diesel remaining in the tank. Diesel is dyed red. Photo taken 09/30/05. NOAA. [SEP] A number of fish can be seen floating in this waterway for about 2.5 miles. However, most of the fish are pushed along the south bank (not visible because of tree shadow). Fish kills were reported in a number of the East Texas/West Louisiana inland waters following Hurricanes Rita and Katrina. Hurricanes and tropical storms commonly cause low dissolved oxygen levels in shallow bays and estuaries. Oxygen levels can drop for a variety of storm-induced reasons, including nutrient buildup followed by algae blooms. Also, storms can drive oxygen-depleted water from marshes into fish habitats. The exact causes of the fish kills that have followed Hurricane Rita aren't yet known for sure. Photo taken 09/30/05. NOAA. [SEP] Here are some additional species - can someone get a BAT to identify and fix this entry? [SEP] In this photo, Hurricane Rita has shifted a storage tank off its foundation, shearing pipes and also breaching the concrete retaining wall designed to confine any spilled material. The failure of the retaining wall allowed spilled diesel fuel to flow into an adjacent waterway. Photo by NOAA. [SEP] Tank in yard near Sabine Pass, deposited by storm surges from Hurricane Rita. Photo by NOAA. [SEP] Holly Beach before and after Rita
This is a general Incident for information covering non-site specific pollution events in Mississippi and Alabama. [SEP] This is some of the impact to wetlands when dredging was used to remove barges with a Nationwide 22 permit. [SEP] Map shows damaged vessels, related hazards, and ESI rankings for coastal areas. [SEP] Map shows priority areas 1 through 8 for areas throughout AL, MS AOR to assess/respond to vessel pollution hazards as of 1430 9/12/05 [SEP] Map shows damaged vessels, related hazards, and ESI rankings for coastal areas. [SEP] Hurricane Katrina Response MS/AL 11/17/05 Situation The debris removal eligibility field assessments continued for the second day. Sites have been visited in Moss Point and Pascaguala. Team members have included State, FEMA, USFWS, DOI, NOAA, and ACOE. Following field assessments today, a meeting was held at the ACOE offices with ACOE, EPA, DOI, NMFS, and NOAA to further discuss the permitting development. The issues discussed were: permitting of debris removal, Security bonds as a condition of the permit to insure restoration/mitigation, Essential Fish Habitat coordination issues to be part of the permit, SHPO and THPO coordination issues to be addressed as part of the permit, and Restoration/mitigation requirements and assurances. A few items still need some work. Notably the SHPO/THPO coordination coordination details and the security bond details. It is hoped that a public notice of the General Permit 28 will be completed soon for a 48 hr public review. Debris removals will be accomplished with a NW 05 permit. SOme NW22 permits will be used where applicable, but will be condition the same as the General permit 28. A NW 33 is to be used for temporary access to removal sites where needed. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Jourdan River, Mississippi I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 10:30 am EDT on September 14, 2005. Information in the report is a general overview of the resources in the area. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report is Jourdan River. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material This report is not based on a spill of any specific product but does provide a general overview of the resources in the area. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline of Jourdan River is mostly salt marsh. Shorelines associated with the canals are sheltered solid man-made structures. V. Biological Resources at Risk Included are general statements about the effects of oil on the various biological resources. The effects may vary based on the type of contaminant, since the behavior, toxicity, and availability of the material can vary from product to product. Fish - Numerous species of fish are present at this time of year including, but not limited to, Atlantic croaker (spawning), bay anchovy (spawning), catfish, gulf menhaden, silversides (spawning), red drum (spawning), silver perch, southern kingfish, spot, sand seatrout, spotted seatrout, stripped mullet, southern flounder, and threadfin shad. In general juvenile and larval fish are most sensitive to spilled oil. Fish in shallow water areas are more likely to be impacted, since there is likely to be a higher concentration of oil in the water column. Surface slicks usually do not have much of an impact on fish. Shellfish - Shellfish in the area include blue crab (spawning), Brown shrimp, pink shrimp (spawning), and white shrimp (spawning). There are oyster beds in Saint Louis Bay at the mouth of the Jourdan River. Juvenile and larval life stages of all of these shellfish are also present in the area. Shellfish in shallow water areas are more likely to be impacted, since it is more probable that there is a higher concentration of oil in the water column. Surface slicks usually do not have much of an impact on crabs and shrimp. Crabs and oysters may be contaminated by a heavy sinking oil. Birds - Present in the area are numerous species of shorebirds, wading birds, osprey, white pelican, brown pelican (federally endangered), bald eagle (federally threatened), peregrine falcon, osprey, mottled duck, terns, double-crested cormorant, common loon, and gulls. October is the beginning of the migratory and overwintering season for waterfowl. Large numbers of waterfowl may be in the area starting in October. Diving birds (pelicans, cormorants) and waterfowl are usually at greatest risk during oil spills, because they spend nearly all their time on the water surface. Waterfowl and wading birds may be directly oiled, and can become oiled on the upper body and feathers by coming in contact with oiled vegetation or wrack. Shorebirds usually avoid oil, but may be impacted by loss of feeding areas or intertidal prey, particularly during migration periods. Gulls, terns, and raptors may be at risk because they are often attracted to and will prey on sick or injured prey. This behavior may result in oiling of feathers and the ingestion of oil. Oiling of birds reduces the buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by feathers, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Preening of oiled feathers may also result in ingestion of oil resulting in irritation, sickness, or death. Bird oiling, particularly for waterfowl and wading birds, may continue even after the floating oil slicks have been removed, depending on the extent of oiled vegetation. Mammals - Beaver, mink, muskrat, raccoon, nutria, river otter, and wild hogs may be found throughout the wetlands and waterways of this area. As with the birds oiling of these animals may reduce buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by the fur, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Grooming of oiled fur may also result in ingestion of oil which may subsequently lead to irritation, sickness, or death. The spilled material may also cause irritation to organs such as the eyes as well as the mucous membranes. Reptiles - American alligator (federally threatened), Gulf salt marsh snake, and Mississippi diamondback terrapin are present in these waters at this time. The terrapins are nesting and hatching at this time of year. Oil may cause irritation and inflammation of the mucus membranes, especially around the eyes and nostrils, in all of these reptiles. VI. Human-Use Resources at Risk There are several boat ramps and marinas located near the mouth of Jourdan River. Also along the shorelines are numerous archaeological sites. [SEP] This photo is a ground-level view of some of the larger vessels that our survey team saw from the air. Owners of vessels of this size and value typically have the resources to work with salvage contractors and develop salvage plans. A process has been established to have their salvage plans reviewed by "Trustees." Trustees are those organizations in Government who have been assigned by law the responsibility of protecting specific natural resources for the American public. Notice the size of the vessel with 40-foot containers and cars. These shipments have been delayed. [SEP] In this photo, taken at Bayou La Batre soon after Hurricane Katrina, stranded fishing vessels are visible in the right section of the photo. An overturned vessel in the channel, surrounded by hard boom, is visible just above the wing of the surveying plane. It has since been righted and removed. The vessels in this photo are among the many vessels that were lifted by Hurricane Katrina's storm surges and overturned, damaged, and/or deposited on land. [SEP] Vessel being removed by dredging under an individual permit issued by ACOE [SEP] Mr Red #2 F/V removed from this site using ACOE NW22 permit see sitrep posted 1/27/06 [SEP] An area of stranded Vessels in Bayou La Batre was visited to discuss removal actions and needs on 27 Oct 2005 [SEP] Flight safety is a "number one" NOAA goal for all field staff. The only published safety certification process for flight safety belongs to the Department of the Interior. Our Fish and Wildlife partner, Warren Lorenz, for our aerial assessment for leaking/lost vessels and tanks is checking the "OAS certified" paperwork from the Evergreen Helicopter pilot, Russ Bowen. Russ had considerable experience in helicopter operations in the Army. He also had many recent hours in this aircraft as an EMS rescue helicopter and in support of the Fire Service. Russ came to us in Mobile from Louisiana where he flew refinery staff to their Katrina damaged facility.
Crude oil spill into the Mississippi River from two damaged storage tanks at Bass Enterprises. Location is near mile marker 35 in Plaquemines Parish, LA. Each tank measures 16' high and 290' in diameter.  About 88,000 to 90,000 bbl have been released, with 10,000 bbl remaining in the tanks.  A large amount of oil is contained in the berm, but a significant amount of oil was lost to both the river and adjacent marsh.  Much of the oil ended up on the downriver side of the facility.  Cleanup in these areas was intense and in-situ burninig took place.  Stage 1 cleanup efforts were finished by 20DEC05.  All zones were in Stage 3 on 09FEB06. [SEP] INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES SOUTH COX BAY Location: Mile Marker 35. Coastal Zone Source: Two tank failures Position: 29 degrees 27 minutes 46.1 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 24.6 seconds West Response Status: Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises Responding OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 90,000 bbl / 26OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 36,557 bbl / 26OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1,708 bbl floating contained 6,493 bbl on shore / 26OCT05 Reported Volume Displaced: 10,921 bbl / 26OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued to remove oil from tank 1004 to prepare for removal. NOAA, DEQ, and USCG conducted site assessment of Zones 2, 5, and 7. Determination made that Zones 2 and 7 were not ready to progress to Stage 2. Future Mitigation Effort: Remove pooled oil and remove debris in Zones 2 and 7. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05 / 19OCT05 Significant Challenges: DEQ noted that facility members were inappropriately burning trash including aerosol canisters. USCG addressed issue with RP on 26OCT05. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES NORTH Location: Mile marker 36. Coastal Zone. Source: Shifted and leaking tanks. Position: 29 degrees 34 minutes 32.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 47 minutes 34.1seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises Responding OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 10,989 bbl / 26OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 2,390 bbl / 26OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 3,234 bbl on shore / 26OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Future Mitigation Efforts: Weather permitting debris burn scheduled for 29OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05/19OCT05. Significant Challenges: NSTR. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES SOUTH COX BAY Location: Mile Marker 35. Coastal Zone Source: Two tank failures Position: 29 degrees 27 minutes 46.1 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 24.6 seconds West Response Status: Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises Responding OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 90,000 bbl / 28OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 36,664 bbl / 28OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1,708 bbl floating contained 6,386 bbl on shore / 28OCT05 Reported Volume Displaced: 10,921 bbl / 28OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued to remove oil from tank 1004 to prepare for removal. All canals at the site have been demobilized. Requesting demobilization of skimmers and all but 25 personnel and some work boats. Future Mitigation Effort: Remove pooled oil and remove debris in Zones 2 and 7. Debris in-situ burn scheduled for 29OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05 / 19OCT05 Significant Challenges: DEQ noted that facility members were inappropriately burning trash including aerosol canisters. USCG addressed issue with RP on 26OCT05. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES NORTH Location: Mile marker 36. Coastal Zone. Source: Shifted and leaking tanks. Position: 29 degrees 34 minutes 32.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 47 minutes 34.1seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises Responding OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 10,989 bbl / 28OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 2,449 bbl / 28OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 3,175 bbl on shore / 28OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Future Mitigation Efforts: Weather permitting debris burn scheduled for 29OCT05. Site assessment scheduled for 01NOV05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05/19OCT05. Significant Challenges: NSTR Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] Bass Enterprises North DATESITE STATUS 9 /13/2005 -able to land and conduct initial assessment -Bass reported 10,400 bbl at facility prior to storm -Tanks have not been sounded yet to determine total oil loss -2 of 3 tanks from commingling facility were moved outside of berm by storm -SE section could not be accessed because it is still submerged. In this section there are 4 tanks that are either underwater or missing but there is no sign of oil -will further evaluate when water recedes 9 /14/2005 -Sampling complete -Plan to boom in the event of rain and will begin collecting oil this week 9 /16/2005 -Starting to bring in boom and excavating equipment -Deployed 350 ft of hard boom -Estimated discharge of 10,989 bbl -5,385 bbl expected to have evaporated -5,604 bbl remaining to be recovered Bass Enterprises South Cox Bay DATESITE STATUS 9 /14/2005 -20797 bbl of oil recovered to date from berm area -100 bbl of oil recovered to date from canals -6700 ft of hard boom deployed in back canal -Stopped pumping berm because they were collecting too much water, and will start using drum skimmers -may have another leak in the berm but cannot find it, will continue searching -2 equipment barges in canal offloading equipment (sorbent, skimmers, etc). One more equipment barge will be loaded and en route by 0600 9/15 -using 3 Marko and 1 drum skimmer in canal -Six 200 bbl barges on site -will start washing/deconning tugs and barges in canals -requested help in procuring quarters barge (what is out there is believed to be unsatisfactory). Will check with MARAD. 9 /15/2005 - MARAD vessel Equality State will be at Port Sulfur at 1600 (40 pers capacity) -NY MARAD ship T/V Empire State will be on site 9/17 (500 per capacity) 9 /16/2005 -400 bbl recovered -545 bales of sorbent recovered from marsh -59,860 ft of sorbent boom deployed to date -rope skimmer active inside berm -Expect Equality State to be on site tonight [SEP] This is a very large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet connection, consider downloading the JPEG version (smaller file size) instead of the PDF. [SEP] INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES SOUTH COX BAY Location: Mile Marker 35. Coastal Zone Source: Two tank failures Position: 29 degrees 27 minutes 46.1 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 24.6 seconds West Response Status: Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises Responding OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 90,000 bbl / 27OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 36,606 bbl / 27OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1,708 bbl floating contained 6,444 bbl on shore / 27OCT05 Reported Volume Displaced: 10,921 bbl / 27OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued to remove oil from tank 1004 to prepare for removal. All canals at the site have been demobilized. Requesting demobilization of skimmers and all but 25 personnel and some work boats. Future Mitigation Effort: Remove pooled oil and remove debris in Zones 2 and 7. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05 / 19OCT05 Significant Challenges: DEQ noted that facility members were inappropriately burning trash including aerosol canisters. USCG addressed issue with RP on 26OCT05. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES NORTH Location: Mile marker 36. Coastal Zone. Source: Shifted and leaking tanks. Position: 29 degrees 34 minutes 32.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 47 minutes 34.1seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises Responding OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 10,989 bbl / 27OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 2,394 bbl / 27OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 3,230 bbl on shore / 27OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Future Mitigation Efforts: Weather permitting debris burn scheduled for 29OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05/19OCT05. Significant Challenges: The Army Corps of Engineers is currently discussing an issue concerning the remediation of canal banks in Plaquemines. [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] Oil moving north towards Cox Bay [SEP] Bass overview map 3 of 4 - JPEG [SEP] 26 SEP USCG image South Bass [SEP] USCG Image 9/20 [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/16
Sweet crude release from two damaged tanks at the Chevron Empire Terminal, across the river from Buras, in Plaquemines Parish, LA. Approximately 24,000 barrels of crude oil were lost -- most of the spilled oil is reported to be contained on-site.  Stage 1 was completed on 14NOV05.  Multiple burns were conducted in a few marsh areas including the Chevron Mobile/Exxon Mobile (XOM) site as well as along the berm where most of the oil spilled was contained.  The area was signed off to Stage 3 on 29NOV05. [SEP] USCG Image - Chevron Pipeline; Empire Facility - 10/6 [SEP] USCG Image - Chevron Pipeline; Empire Facility - 10/6 [SEP] The bright green grass was the burned area. Photo by Willie Whitmore [SEP] Four days after a burn to remove oil and oiled vegetation from the marsh adjacent to the facility, bullrush (Scirpus) have begun to sprout from their roots. The burn successfully removed large quantities of oil and oiled vegetation without damaging root systems of marsh plants. The roots were insulated from the heat of the burn by standing water in the marsh (which the response team ensured was present before initiating the burn). NOAA photo, taken on 17 Oct 2005 [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PIPELINE; EMPIRE FACILITY Location: Buras, LA, Mile Marker 30, Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured Tank Position: 29 degrees 22 minutes 9.5 seconds North, 89 degrees 32 minutes 5.6 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil/Diesel. Facility Owner: Chevron Pipeline. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 23,614 bbl / 01OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 1,438 bbl / 01OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 200 bbl / 01OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Focused on remaining oil in retention area. Future Mitigation Efforts: Aggressive recovery operations. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 03OCT05 / 01OCT05 Significant Challenges: ICS-209 Mass Oil Balance/Oil Budget reflects total oil and water recovered Company reps will ensure future ICS-209???€?s reflect proper reporting. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] Photo provided by Louisiana DEQ, forwarded by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry on 5 Sept 2005. Original file name: KOilSpillResponses050906.doc [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PIPELINE; EMPIRE FACILITY Location: Buras, LA, Mile Marker 30, Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured Tank Position: 29 degrees 22 minutes 9.5 seconds North, 89 degrees 32 minutes 5.6 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil/Diesel. Facility Owner: Chevron Pipeline. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 33,900 bbl / 20OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 1,784 bbl / 20OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl floating contained 0 bbl on shore / 20OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Surveyed burned areas determined that 2.7 bbls burned off. Evacuated personnel in preparation of possible impact by hurricane Wilma. Scare cannons deployed in Zone 7 to deter ducks from entering into contaminated area. Future Mitigation Efforts: Await passage of Hurricane. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05 / 19OCT05 Significant Challenges: Nothing new to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PIPELINE; EMPIRE FACILITY Location: Buras, LA, Mile Marker 30, Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured Tank Position: 29 degrees 22 minutes 9.5 seconds North, 89 degrees 32 minutes 5.6 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil/Diesel. Facility Owner: Chevron Pipeline. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 23,614 bbl / 30SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 2,371 bbl / 30SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 300 bbl / 30SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Moved to 24-hour recovery operations. Passive recovery efforts used for marshline. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue recovery operations. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 03OCT05 / 30SEP05 Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PIPELINE; EMPIRE FACILITY Location: Buras, LA, Mile Marker 30, Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured Tank Position: 29 degrees 22 minutes 9.5 seconds North, 89 degrees 32 minutes 5.6 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil/Diesel. Facility Owner: Chevron Pipeline. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 33,900 bbl / 04OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 1,780 bbl / 04OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl / 04OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Maximize recovery operations in marsh area. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue recovery operations; enter maintenance phase. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 04OCT05 / 04OCT05 Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] USCG Chevron Empire Exxon barge canal area 11 OCT 05
Broken wellhead, located in the Wagon Wheel near Venice in Plaquemines Parish LA. An estimated 200 bbl of oil was spilled. Sorbents are being used to collect floating oil. [SEP] USCG Image 9/20 [SEP] This entry constitutes the Final ResponseLink Report for this incident. This was one of many oil spills that were responded to as part of the USCG ESF-10 support. INCIDENT: CHEVRON WAGON WHEEL Location: In the "Wagon Wheel" near Venice, LA. Coastal Zone. Source: Broken Wellhead. Response Status: Secured, Contained, Passive Recovery. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: US Environmental Services. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 200 bbl/20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 75 bbl/20Sep05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 42 bbl/20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Non-essential equipment and personnel have left the site. Passive recovery measures have been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume following the passage of Hurricane Rita. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None Reported. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Spill Budget and Resource Summary for further detail. [SEP] Generated by Tom Moore [SEP] USCG Image 9/20 [SEP] Generated by Tom Moore. [SEP] Generated by Tom Moore. [SEP] Generated by Tom Moore. This is a large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet connection, consider downloading the JPEG version (smaller file size) instead of the PDF. [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/16 [SEP] CHEVRON WAGON WHEEL DATESITE STATUS 9 /11/ 2005 -13 cu yds of solid waste -recovered 62 bbl to date -removing equipment -transitioning into monitoring phase -found 10,000 gal lube oil tank off of the facility in 3-4 ft of water -will submit a 204 for removal of same 9 /12/ 2005 -No black oil or skimmable oil present, just sheen -will do overflight Wed at high tide to look for oil 9 /13/ 2005 -Requested site assessment for tomorrow to enter monitoring phase (USCG, NOAA and LA DEQ will co-ordinate) -67 bbl of oily water collected to date -107 cu yd of solid waste 9 /14/ 2005 -oil was seen during assessment -another assessment will be conducted 9/16 -recovered 25 cu yd of sorbent 9 /15/ 2005 -Continuing operations pending new assessment overflight 9 /16/ 2005 -75 bbl of oil/water recovered -139 cu yd of solid waste recovered -100,000 ft of sorbent boom deployed [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/17 [SEP] Generated by Tom Moore. This is a large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet connection, consider downloading the JPEG version (smaller file size) instead of the PDF.
Ruptured pipeline that has discharged oil into marshland; located near Houma, LA. Response crews are flushing the marsh to allow oil to be skimmed and transferred into vac trucks. [SEP] CHEVRON FOURCHON DATESITE STATUS 9 /13/ 2005 -continue low pressure water flush of surrounding marsh area -Chevron reached an agreement with land owner regarding access -1050 bbl of oil/water mix recovered -255 cu yd of solid waste recovered -Wildlife 46 oiled birds (14 cleaned, 19 DOA, 13 facility death) 5 cats cleaned 9 /14/ 2005 -1140 bbl of oil/water mix recovered -280 cu yd of solid waste recovered -continuing to flush the marsh -Wildlife 55 oiled birds (17 cleaned, 22 DOA, 15 facility death, 1 released) 6 cats cleaned -Requested site assessment to enter monitoring phase on 9/16 9 /15/ 2005 -No impacted wildlife observed -Recovered 1140 bbl of oil/water -Collected 290 cu yd of sorbent -Site assessment for maintenance phase scheduled for tomorrow 9 /16/ 2005 -waiting for results from overflight today -may release manpower and skimmers for other responses -recommend keeping deployed boom in place [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/16 [SEP] Jacqui Michele on site 9.17.2005 [SEP] This entry constitutes the Final ResponseLink Report for this incident. This was one of many oil spills that were responded to as part of the USCG ESF-10 support. INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON PIPELINE Location: Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Position: 29 degrees 07 minutes 30.2 seconds North, 90 degrees 12 minutes 28.0 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Passive Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and TRUSSCO. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl / 28SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl / 28SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl / 28SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Site was reviewed and signed-off. Future Mitigation Efforts: Monitor natural attenuation at site. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 28SEP05/28SEP05 Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON PIPELINE Location: Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and TRUSSCO. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl, 20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl, 20Seo05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl, 20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Non-essential equipment and personnel have left the site. Passive recovery measures have been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume following the passage of Hurricane Rita. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Spill Budget and Resource Summary for further detail. [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON PIPELINE Location: Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Location: 29.1152 N, 90.2066 W Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and TRUSSCO. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl, 20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl, 20Seo05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl, 20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Non-essential equipment and personnel have left the site. Passive recovery measures have been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume following the passage of Hurricane Rita. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON PIPELINE Location: Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Position: 29 degrees 07 minutes 30.2 seconds North, 90 degrees 12 minutes 28.0 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and TRUSSCO. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl / 27SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl / 27Seo05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl / 27SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Response equipment and personnel are remobilizing. Recovery is ongoing with sign-off team assessment scheduled for 28SEP05. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume when response personnel and equipment have fully deployed. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON PIPELINE Location: Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Location: 29 degrees 07 minutes 30.2 seconds North, 90 degrees 12 minutes 28.0 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and TRUSSCO. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl, 20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl, 20Seo05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl, 20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Response equipment and personnel are being remobilized. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume when response personnel and equipment have fully deployed. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] Jacqui Michel on site 9.17.2005 [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/17
Discharge of sweet crude oil near the main channel leading into the Gulf. Incident location is in Pass Tante Phine Pass at the Venice Energy Service Co., 5 miles SW of Venice. Oil is contained in the berm, with 3 inches of freeboard. Containment and sorbent boom have been deployed and skimmers and barges are on scene. [SEP] Test burn of roseau cane tentatively set for Monday, October 10, 2005 [SEP] INCIDENT: DYNEGY VENICE Location: Venice, LA. Coastal Zone. Source: Two storage tank failures. Source secured. Position: 29 degrees 14 minutes 11.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 23 minutes 1.5 seconds West Response Status: Source secured. Stage 2. Product: Light sweet crude oil. Facility Owner: Dynegy. Responding OSRO: U.S. Environmental Services. *Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 592 bbl / 22OCT05 *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 444 bbl / 22OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1 bbl floating contained 0 bbl on shore/ 22OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Completed Stage 1 as of 19OCT05. Future Mitigation Efforts: Managed recovery. Remove stained Roseau IVO facility equipment. Conduct Stage 3 assessment OOA 31OCT05. Completion Date of Gross Cleanup-Stage 1: Completed 19OCT05. Significant Challenges: NSTR. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Received 22OCT05 ICS-209 on 24OCT05. Will only be receiving ICS-209 forms from Dynegy Venice once a week due to progression to Stage 2. [SEP] USCG Image Dynegy Venice - 9/29/05 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image - Dynegy Venice - 10/4 [SEP] USCG Dynegy Removal of Rosoe in Zone E 11 OCT 05 [SEP] USCG Image - Dynegy Venice - 10/6 [SEP] INCIDENT: DYNEGY VENICE Location: Wagon Wheel Near Venice, LA. Coastal Zone. Source: Two tank failures. Source secured. Position: 29 degrees 14 minutes 11.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 23 minutes 1.5 seconds West Response Status: Source secured. Product: Light crude oil. Facility Owner: Dynegy. Responding OSRO: U.S. Environmental Services. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 591 bbl / 28SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 388 bbl / 28SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 56 bbl / 28SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Response operations resumed. Future Mitigation Efforts: Increased productivity with newly acquired additional resources. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] Pocket of Oil near tank 41B [SEP] USCG Image Dynegy Venice - 9/29/05 [SEP] INCIDENT: DYNEGY VENICE Location: Wagon Wheel Near Venice, LA. Coastal Zone. Source: Two tank failures. Source secured. Location: 29.2231 N, 89.3947 W Response Status: Source secured. Product: Light crude oil. Facility Owner: Dynegy. Responding OSRO: U.S. Environmental Services. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,664 Bbl, 20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 2,522 Bbl, 20Sep05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 423 Bbl, 20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Non-essential equipment and personnel have left the site. Passive recovery measures have been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume following passage of Hurricane Rita. The RP has identified additional resources, including berthing, personnel, and more capable pumping systems, to be put into operation once active site work resumes. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: 23Sep05 / 15Sep05. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image 9/20
Multiple pipelines and facilities located in a remote area 4.5 miles S of Heads Pass. Spill volume is unknown. [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. This was one of many oil spills that were responded to as part of the USCG ESF-10 support. Follow up investigation at this site and more than 120 other small spills was shifted to the Pollution Investigation Team. NOAA provided support to multiple USCG activities simultaneously as part of the ESF-10 response effort. [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] Forest Oil DATESITE STATUS 9 /12/ 2005 -CG determined that facility thought to be Vintage Oil's is actually Forest's. -RP POC has been established 9 /13/ 2005 -could not get overflight -owner of facility estimates max discharge potential is 14 bbl 9 /14/ 2005 -could not get overflight 9 /15/ 2005 -could not get overflight 9 /16/ 2005 -Site inspected and judged to have mostly mud -Estimate approximately 2 bbl of recoverable oil -Recommended for downgrade
Murphy Oil (Greater New Orleans, St. Bernard Parish LA) -- One storage tank with a 250,000 bbl capacity leaked an estimated 19,500 bbls of medium sour crude oil. Oil released from this tank breached secondary containment and was observed in residential neighborhoods adjacent to the facility. [SEP] 26 SEP (1) [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Arabian medium crude oil. Facility Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 35,140 bbl / 01OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 18,448 bbl / 01OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2,233 bbl / 01OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Recovery operations. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continued recovery operations. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 22OCT05 / 01OCT05. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Arabian medium crude oil. Facility Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,110 bbl / 08OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 17,342 bbl / 08OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 518 bbl / 08OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Completed bulk sand removal in streets. Used street sweepers for miscellaneous piles. Future Mitigation Efforts: Opening up sewer man holes for upcoming drain flushing. Flushing will begin 12OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 14OCT05 / 08OCT05. Significant Challenges: State Fish and Wildlife stated that no animals are to be removed from site. [SEP] Photo provided by Louisiana DEQ, forwarded by NOAA SSC C. Henry on 5 Sept 2005. Original file name: K050904_1410(LDEQ).jpg [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Arabian medium crude oil. Facility Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,110 bbl / 24OCT05 *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 17,810 bbl / 24OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 3 bbl floating contained 266 bbl on shore / 24OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Removed vehicles stranded in canals. Continued storm drain flushing. Completed flushing of 16 total (cumulative) streets. Removed containers. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue flushing storm drains. Estimated date to complete flushing operations is OOA 29OCT05 (this may be extended.) Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05/19OCT05. Significant Challenges: One truck involved with storm drain flushing is OOC. ETA to replacement or repair is unknown. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Volume recovered was decreased by 220 bbl on 24OCT05 due to improved analysis for oil recovered from contaminated soil. [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Arabian medium crude oil. Facility Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,110 bbl / 29OCT05 *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 17,891 bbl / 29OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 3 bbl floating contained 185 bbl on shore / 29OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Completed storm drain flushing on 29OCT05. Sorbent booms are being maintained. Army Corps of Engineers are picking up debris along the canal. Hard boom removal being conducted in Delaron canal. Future Mitigation Efforts: Site assessment rescheduled for 04NOV05. Next on-site meeting with USCG, EPA, DEQ and NOAA is scheduled for 03NOV05 to transfer control of site to EPA. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 04NOV05/UNK. Significant Challenges: NSTR Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained but not secured. Location: 29.9491 N, 89.9305 W Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Mixed crude oil, best represented by Arabian Medium API 30.8. Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 35,140 bbl/20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 14,937 bbl/20Sep05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 6,497 bbl/20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Despite initial plans to continue work on the site as long as possible, the Parish President ordered full evacuation to be completed by 1200 today. Non-essential equipment and personnel have left the site. Passive recovery measures have been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume following the passage of Hurricane Rita. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: 22Oct05 / 17Sep05. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Arabian medium crude oil. Facility Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,110 bbl / 07OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 17,225 bbl / 07OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 599 bbl / 07OCT05* Current Mitigation Efforts: Flushed canals and oil being recovered by booming and skimming operations. Decontaminated demobilized equipment. Future Mitigation Efforts: Develop force reduction plan and sign off criteria for maintenance phase with NOAA, LA DEQ and USCG. Nearby roads need to be cleaned of debris prior to flushing of storm drains. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 22OCT05 / 04OCT05. Significant Challenges: Flushing of storm drains will be an issue due to lack of storm drain maps. All city maps were destroyed. Water for flushing will be problematic due to no water pressure in city water and fire mains. US Fish and Wildlife captured alligator in response area. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. *1) Total volume of recovered oil revised ???€? Daily quantities of oil recovered are based on the number/capacity of vacuum trucks discharging each day. This volume was reconciled based on measurements of the volume of oil and water contained in the Recovered Oil Tank (150-2). The total volume was increased by 175 bbls. 2) Total volume evaporated ???€? The volume of oil evaporated was originally estimated at 40% of the amount spilled using the ADIOS 2 model. The estimated amount evaporated had been reduced to 30% because we believe the ADIOS model will overstate the amount evaporated because it is designed to estimate evaporation of spills from open water. The oil spilled was contained in deeper pools than would occur with an open water spill due to the containment areas and canals in which most of the oil collected. The evaporation estimate has further been reduced to 28%. 3) Onshore volume revised ???€? The volume of oil remaining onshore has been reduced to reflect shoreline washing operations conducted this week. 4) Floating, Contained volume revised ???€? The volume of oil estimated to be floating, contained was revised based on the volume changes to the other categories.* [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained but not secured. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Mixed crude oil. Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 35,140 bbl / 28SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 16,920 bbl / 28SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1,686 bbl / 28SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued focused efforts on canal oil removal. Overflights completed for site supervisor. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue aggressive recovery operations. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image - Murphy Oil - 10/23 [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/17 [SEP] Photo provided by Louisiana DEQ, forwarded by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry on 5 Sept 2005. Original file name: KOilSpillResponses050906.doc
Report of a sheen (area unknown) coming from a displaced tank. Location is N of Pilot Town, on the W bank of the Mississippi. [SEP] Initial sites identified as potential incidents are overlaid on a satellite image. [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/17 [SEP] Tank North of Pilot Town DATESITE STATUS 9 /12/ 2005 -MRC Admiral is en route -Have boomed with hard boom and 2 rows of sorbents 9 /13/ 2005 -200 ft of hard boom deployed -sorbent boom has been removed and replaced -tank has 400 bbl capacity -leak apparently under water -flange above waterline may be used to remove remaining product (not recommended at this time) 9 /14/ 2005 -NRC Admiral got underway after resuppyling - ETA is 1200 9/15 -plan to change out the sorbent 9 /15/ 2005 -Admiral on site -Collected and replace 300' of sorbent boom -ACoE cleared debris around tank enabling Admiral to get close -Estimate 80 bbl left in tank -Looking into pumping product from tank to Admiral's 150 bbl 9 /16/ 2005 -Identified Tug Angelique E as possible asset to deliver barge with portable tank to site [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/16 [SEP] INCIDENT: DISPLACED TANK ALONG RIVERBANK Location: North of Pilot Town, West Bank. Coastal. Source: Tank Location: 29.1847 N, 89.5375 W Response Status: Product: Unknown oil. Facility Owner: Unkown. Responding OSRO: OSRV ADMIRAL o/s with 1 CG personnel and 7 contractors. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: Unknown. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: Current Mitigation Efforts: Tank has been emptied and all recovered contents will be disposed of. OSRV ADMIRAL has departed the scene. Future Mitigation Efforts: No future plans for further recovery. Will be removed from future summaries. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: None. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] INCIDENT: DISPLACED TANK ALONG RIVERBANK Location: North of Pilot Town, West Bank. Coastal. Source: Tank Response Status: Product: Unknown oil. Facility Owner: Unkown. Responding OSRO: OSRV ADMIRAL o/s with 1 CG personnel and 7 contractors. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: Unknown. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: Current Mitigation Efforts: Tank has been emptied and all recovered contents will be disposed of. OSRV ADMIRAL has departed the scene. Future Mitigation Efforts: No future plans for further recovery. Will be removed from future summaries. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: None. Refer to current Oil Spill Budget and Resource Summary for further detail.
A 20 inch diameter pipeline near Port Sulfur (MM35), supported by a berm that lost 150 feet in the hurricane, ruptured with a 2-inch by 6-inch hole. An unknown amount of oil has been released into a nearby marsh and created a sheen 5 to 6 miles long. Drum skimmers are being used in the marsh and 7,000 feet of boom has been deployed in the marsh. [SEP] USCG Image - Shell Nairn - 10/5 [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / 14OCT05. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 255 bbl / 14OCT05. Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 10 bbl on shore / 14 OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: No field operations conducted. Future Mitigation Efforts: Some response operations to resume on 24OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Legal issues regarding cleaning of adjoining private properties are again a problem. However facility is willing to restart operations once adjoining private property owner agrees to allow Katrina oil clean up. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. *Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / 28OCT05. *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 255 bbl / 28OCT05. *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 10 bbl on shore / 28OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Facility management has identified all private property owners in Zones 1,3,4,5,6, and 7. Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Future Mitigation Efforts: Contact private property owners to gain access to impacted land. Crews to work on zone 4, then 6, then 1. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: NSTR Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Did not receive updated ICS-209. [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured pipe. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured (Tank Empty). Site was contained but is currently uncontained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,245 bbl / 27SEP05. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 95 bbl / 27SEP05. Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 30 bbl / 27SEP05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Reassessed oil impact via overflight of nearby marsh in aftermath of Hurricane Rita. Future Mitigation Efforts: Develop booming strategies for sheen with sorbent boom. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: 10OCT05 / 15SEP05. Significant Challenges: All boom in nearby marsh in disarray and ineffective due to high winds and waters from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image - Shell Nairn - 10/5 [SEP] USCG Image - Shell Nairn - 9/30 [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. *Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / 28OCT05. *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 255 bbl / 28OCT05. *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 10 bbl on shore / 28OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Facility management has identified all private property owners in Zones 1,3,4,5,6, and 7. Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Found abandoned isolated pipeline with minimal oil. Clean-up completed for newly discovered oil on 29OCT05. Future Mitigation Efforts: Contact private property owners to gain access to impacted land. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: NSTR Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Did not receive updated ICS-209. [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. *Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / 14OCT05. *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 255 bbl / 14OCT05. *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 10 bbl on shore / 14 OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Debris removed along private property line. Future Mitigation Efforts: Site assessment to be scheduled for Marsh side of levee. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Legal issues regarding cleaning of adjoining private properties are again a problem. However facility is willing to restart operations once adjoining private property owner agrees to allow Katrina oil clean up. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Did not receive ICS-209 from Shell Nairn. [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / 30SEP05. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 155 bbl / 30SEP05. Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 10 bbl / 30SEP05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Aggressive recovery operations. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue recovery operations. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Threat to workers in area of cleanup from an alligator nursery hatch. LA. Dept. of Wildlife and fisheries is training workers in area on how to conduct themselves in the vicinity of the alligator. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image Shell Nairn - 9/28/05 [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / 02OCT05. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 215 bbl / 02OCT05. Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 10 bbl / 02OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued recovery operations. Future Mitigation Efforts: Anticipating need for gross oil signoff on 05OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 05OCT05/02OCT05. Significant Challenges: Rattle snakes discovered near pipeline. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details.
Discharge of sweet crude oil from an above-ground tank into the Mississippi River at mile marker 3, caused by a microwave tower that fell and pierced the tank.  A pipeline was also breached.  The spill occured within the containment berm of the facility.  Much of the oil was most likely lost/released/dispersed during the hurricane.  Approximately 22,685 barrels were recovered.  The entire facility was moved into Stage 3 on 26OCT05. [SEP] USCG Image -Shell Pilot Town - 10/7 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL PILOT TOWN Location: Pilot Town, LA. Mile Marker 3. Coastal Zone. Source: Pipeline breach. Position: 29 degrees 11 minutes 3.6 seconds North, 89 degrees 15 minutes 0.2 seconds West Response Status: Contained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,435 bbl / 03OCT05.* Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 20,080 bbl / 03OCT05.* Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2,605 bbl / 03OCT05* Current Mitigation Efforts: Transferred oil from a tank with small hole to another storage tank and begin storage tanks decanting. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue to decant storage tanks. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 13OCT05 / 03OCT05. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Reported cumulative volume spilled reflects a clerical error in historical data and is reconciled. [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] Prepared by Tom Moore. This is a large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet connection, consider downloading the JPEG version (smaller file size) instead of the PDF. [SEP] USCG Image -Shell Pilot Town - 10/5 [SEP] PILOT TOWN DATESITE STATUS 9 /12/ 2005 -received spud barges -hopper barge still en route -recovering oiled sorbents and isolating it in temporary storage -Containment area leaching black oil slowly on west side where earlier repair was -start pumping tank 1506 into OSRB 570 -2600 bbl was pumped into tank 1547 from the containment 9 /13/ 2005 -2700 bbl pumped into tank 14-57 from berm -Additional 400 ft of hard boom for 3000 ft total deployed -a small leak was noted in tank14-57 -2nd spud barge being waked -requested no wake zone was denied but slow speed (< 10knt) was approved -Recovered 20 bags of sorbent and replaced 9 /14/ 2005 -1500 ft of sorbent boom deployed -300 ft of snare deployed -20 cu yds of oiled sorbents collected -oil level in berm decreased one ft -14-57 being pumped into barge 560 due to leak -Pilot boats are now slowing down 9 /15/ 2005 -Transfered 11206 bbl from tank 1506 to barge 570 for a total of 25364 bbl removed -10 cu yds of sorbent collected -2000' of hard boom, 4500' of sorbent, and 1000' of snare deployed 9 /16/ 2005 -Tank 1457 has stabilized (no further loss of product anticipated) -Tank1505 has stabilized (no further loss of product anticipated) -500 additional ft of snare deployed -Barge 402 is 1 ft from being full. -Operations continue to be waked by river traffic [SEP] Aerial overview 3 of 4 - JPEG [SEP] USCG Shell Pilot Town 14 OCT 05 (5) [SEP] Prepared by Tom Moore. This is a large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet connection, consider downloading the JPEG version (smaller file size) instead of the PDF.
Sundown East: Ruptured tanks and piping. Estimated spill volume: cumulative 450 bbl. Remote site with difficult access, located at Potash, LA, E bank of Mississippi R, mile marker 40. Sundown West: Ruptured tanks and piping. Estimated spill volume: cumulative 320 bbl medium crude oil. Remote site, located at Potash, LA, just N of Port Sulphur on W bank of Mississippi. [SEP] photo by William Whitmore [SEP] INCIDENT: SUNDOWN EAST Location: Potash, LA, East bank of Mississippi. Mile Marker 40. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 29 minutes 48.3 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 38.5 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,236 bbl / 24OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 376 bbl / 24OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained ???€?undetermined???€? onshore / 24OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Cleaned pooled oil along perimeter of property. Future Mitigation Efforts: Possible site assessment by NOAA, DEQ, and USCG on 28OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Week of 23OCT05/19OCT05 Significant Challenges: NSTR. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Some minor residual oiling still persists and will be removed with sorbent material. INCIDENT: SUNDOWN WEST Location: Potash, LA ???€? Just North of Port Sulfur on the West Bank of the river. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 28 minutes 19.6 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 54.3 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 320 bbl / 24OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 197 bbl / 24OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 123 bbl on shore / 24OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: No field operations. (see significant challenges.) Future Mitigation Efforts: Pends (see significant challenges.) Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 28OCT05/21OCT05. Significant Challenges: A class action law suit stemming from Katrina has been filed against Sundown West. It is unknown at this time if it will impact response operations. Remaining areas to clean are believed to be on private property (undetermined whether property owner is part of law suit). However, contaminated land may be located on areas that are considered to be DOT easements and Parrish controlled drainage ditches with access from public highway. Response operations pend while determination is made. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * No free oil remains on the site. The remaining 123 bbl is an estimate of oil that is contained in the soils near the facility and on stained vegetation. [SEP] USCG Sundown West Tank on river levee MST 1 Highfill 11 Oct 05 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image Sundown East Facility (1) [SEP] USCG Image - Sundown East - 10/08 [SEP] INCIDENT: SUNDOWN EAST Location: Potash, LA, East bank of Mississippi. Mile Marker 40. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 29 minutes 48.3 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 38.5 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,236 bbl / 26OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 376 bbl / 26OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained ???€?undetermined???€? onshore / 26OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: No field operations conducted. Future Mitigation Efforts: Site assessment scheduled for 28OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 28OCT05/26OCT05 Significant Challenges: NSTR. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Some minor residual oiling still persists and will be removed with sorbent material. INCIDENT: SUNDOWN WEST Location: Potash, LA ???€? Just North of Port Sulfur on the West Bank of the river. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 28 minutes 19.6 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 54.3 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 320 bbl / 26OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 197 bbl / 26OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 123 bbl on shore / 26OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Facility is working with state DOT representatives to determine location of easement on impacted private property. (see significant challenges.) Future Mitigation Efforts: Pends (see significant challenges.) Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 28OCT05/21OCT05. Significant Challenges: A class action law suit stemming from Katrina has been filed against Sundown West. It is unknown at this time if it will impact response operations. Remaining areas to clean are believed to be on private property (undetermined whether property owner is part of law suit). However, contaminated land may be located on areas that are considered to be DOT easements and Parrish controlled drainage ditches with access from public highway. Response operations pend while this determination is made. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * No free oil remains on the site. The remaining 123 bbl is an estimate of oil that is contained in the soils near the facility and on stained vegetation. [SEP] USCG Image - Sundown East - 9/30 [SEP] INCIDENT: SUNDOWN EAST Location: Potash, LA, East bank of Mississippi. Mile Marker 40. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 29 minutes 48.3 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 38.5 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,236 bbl / 27OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 376 bbl / 27OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained ???€?undetermined???€? onshore / 27OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Reduced to minimal crew for Saturday, returning on Sunday. Future Mitigation Efforts: Site assessment rescheduled for 31OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 28OCT05/26OCT05 Significant Challenges: NSTR. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Some minor residual oiling still persists and will be removed with sorbent material. INCIDENT: SUNDOWN WEST Location: Potash, LA ???€? Just North of Port Sulfur on the West Bank of the river. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 28 minutes 19.6 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 54.3 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 320 bbl / 27OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 197 bbl / 27OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 123 bbl on shore / 27OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Facility is working with state DOT representatives to access easements along highway for clean-up. (see significant challenges.) Future Mitigation Efforts: Pends (see significant challenges.) Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 28OCT05/21OCT05. Significant Challenges: A class action law suit stemming from Katrina has been filed against Sundown West. It is unknown at this time if it will impact response operations. Remaining areas to clean are believed to be on private property (undetermined whether property owner is part of law suit). However, contaminated land may be located on areas that are considered to be DOT easements and Parrish controlled drainage ditches with access from public highway. Response operations pend while this determination is made. Site survey rescheduled for 31OCT05. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * No free oil remains on the site. The remaining 123 bbl is an estimate of oil that is contained in the soils near the facility and on stained vegetation. [SEP] INCIDENT: SUNDOWN EAST Location: Potash, LA, East bank of Mississippi. Mile Marker 40. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 29 minutes 48.3 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 38.5 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 450 bbl / 30SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 255 bbl / 30SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 130 bbl / 30SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued aggressive recovery operations. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue aggressive recovery operations. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 06OCT05 / 30SEP05 Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. INCIDENT: SUNDOWN WEST Location: Potash, LA ???€? Just North of Port Sulfur on the West Bank of the river. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 28 minutes 19.6 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 54.3 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 320 bbl / 30SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 183 bbl / 30SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: Less then 2 bbl / 30SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Aggressive cleanup operations on oiled levees. Future Mitigation Efforts: Company representatives have requested and applied for debris burn permit for oiled debris. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Nothing
Potential spill. Multiple pipelines and facilities located in a remote area at South Pass 24/Dixon Bay [SEP] This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. This was one of many oil spills that were responded to as part of the USCG ESF-10 support. [SEP] Vintage Oil DATESITE STATUS 9 /12/ 2005 -2 work barges and + small crews on site -Dixon Bay Platform boomed, contained and secure 9 /13/ 2005 -Vintage claims no ongoing spill in area because they claim they pumped their tanks down prior to storm and filled with salt water -14 bbl of oil unaccounted for 9 /14/ 2005 -could not get overflight 9 /15/ 2005 -could not get overflight 9 /16/ 2005 -was overflown 9/15 and 9/16 -only light and unrecoverable sheen observed -recommend downgrading
Sector Tampa asked for trajectory for the F/V Mr Natural which had been adrift since 26 Aug 30 miles south of Cape Romano.Position of the vessel on 31 Aug at 1950 hrs was 27-17.8N;  082-59.6WVessel had max of 4000 gallons of diesel on board.  NOAA provided some info as to expected drift track of the vessel and trajectory of oil is 4000 gal was released as well as wx forecast. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information related to the FV Mr Natural, South of Cape Romano, FL incident. [SEP] F/V MR NATURAL, OFFSHORE FOM TAMPA BAY, FL 1200 EDT, Friday September 2, 2005 Sunset (9/02): 1951 Sunrise (9/03): 0712 Sunset (9/03): 1950 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Saturday, the winds are expected to continue from the NE at 10-15 knots. _________________________ Seas: Today through Saturday, the swell are forecast to be 2-3 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Saturday, no precipitation is forecast in the region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Friday, clear skies are expected. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the low 90???€?s to lows in the low 70???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, NE winds at 10-15. Clear skies. No precipitation is forecast. Monday, NE winds at 10-15. Clear skies. No precipitation is forecast. Tuesday, NE winds at 10-15. Clear skies. No precipitation is forecast. [SEP] Date: 1400 EDT September 2, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: F/V Mr Natural, adrift offshore Sarasota Bay, FL FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a drifting vessel offshore Sarasota Bay FL. These notes are based on the following information: The F/V Mr Natural was reported adrift since 26 August 2005 30 nm south of Cape Romano. On 31 August 1950 hours the vessel was reported at 27o 17.8???€?N, 082 o 59.6???€?W; today at 0830 hours the vessel was reported at 27o 12.416???€?N, 082 o 53.367???€?W. Maximum potential fuel onboard is reported to be 4,000 gallons of diesel. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Saturday, the winds are expected to continue from the NE at 10-15 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY The vessel is currently drifting at slightly more than 0.2 knots downcoast. We expect the vessel to continue to move downcoast, covering about 5.2 nm per day, and staying outside the 10 fathom isobath. If the fuel were lost from the vessel, a sheen extending downwind and downcurrent could be visible for at most 1/2 nm. Any fuel lost is not expected to reach the coast. 3) OIL FATE Diesel Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 75 deg F Time of Initial Release = September 2, 1100 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 4,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 4,000 - 9 - 6 - 84 2 4,000 18 21 60 3 4,000 - 24 - 41 - 34 4 4,000 27 57 16 5 4,000 - 28 - 64 - 8
This is a general Incident for information covering non-site specific pollution events in Louisiana. [SEP] Photo provided by Louisiana DEQ, forwarded by NOAA SSC on 5 Sept 2005. Original file name: K050904_1434(LDEQ).jpg [SEP] Removing the yellow hard boom from the retention pond at the Chevron Empire facility, near the end of successful cleanup operations. White sorbent boom along the bank of the pond continues to collect remobilized sheen. Photo by U.S. Coast Guard, 10/6/05 [SEP] Aids to Navigation Map - Mississippi River Gulf Outlet - Southwest Passage, prepared 8 September by the Situation Unit [SEP] Dynegy Venice facility on October 5, 2005, still partially submerged after hurricane-caused flooding. Light tan-colored material is cane grass that was blown loose by Hurricane Katrina, and has been deposited at the facility. [SEP] Overflight photo provided by NOAA SSC. Original filename: 100_3380.JPG [SEP] USCG Image - Dynegy Venice - 10/1 [SEP] View of Chandeleur Islands looking North from its Southern extent. The islands are located offshore of the Mississippi River delta. [SEP] USCG Image - 9/28 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/28 [SEP] Washing down the oiled retention berm at the Shell Pilot Town facility, using water pumped from the Mississippi River. Photo by U.S. Coast Guard, 10/7/05 [SEP] Workers removing oiled cane grass at the Dynegy Venice facility. Cane grass was blown from surrounding marshland and deposited at the facility by Hurricane Katrina. [SEP] A small pit in the foreground of this photo is being used as a collection point for spilled oil within the retention area around damaged storage tanks. Oil that collects in the pit is vacuumed up and removed. Photo by U.S. Coast Guard, 10/7/05
At 0715 on Monday, August 15, well head in the Pass A Loutre Wildlife ManagementArea blew out, spewing crude oil and natural gas into the surrounding freshwatermarsh.  The spill, from Enervest Well #501, is located at 29d 05'45"N, 089d10'09"W released approximately 50 bbls of oil.  Some sheen moved from the immediate area and outthrough Dennis Pass into the Gulf of Mexico, but most of the oil was contained inthe marsh, much of it in two different pockets approximately 200 yards by 150'. Some of the oil stuck in the bordering Roseau cane.  2000' of boom was on-scene as well as 5 skimmers were on-scene.  No wildlife injuries were reported were. [SEP] On Tuesday during cleanup operations it was acknowledged that there was much more oil then initially reported. The current estimate was increased to at least 175 barrels of oil in the water. At the Tuesday evening brief, a SCAT plan was developed for the next day. Today two boats with members of USCG, NOAA, LADEQ, and representatives for the RP covered the spill area to the south and west of the spill source. There are some areas where some emulsified oil has accumulated, but most of the roseau cane seen was either slightly stained or unaffected. The areas further south and west had some sheen in the water, but appeared to be unaffected. The tides appear to be playing a large role in the spill, with two foot tidal changes adjusting the location of the boom. The tidal change also formed a strong current that helped flush out spilled out and sheen. Most of the oil is contained in the containment boom in two different zones, but some sheen is actually moving far enough down Dennis Pass that sheen and water hyasinth is drifting down out into the Gulf of Mexico. There have been no impacts observed along the land from this sheen. SCAT will continue tomorrow, and once completed a detailed map describing the impacted areas will be drawn up. Over 150 barrels of liquid have been recovered on scene from skimmers. Hazing canons were placed on scene this morning and there have been no reported wildlife injuries. The NOAA SSC continues to work the incident. [SEP] As of 1000 Tuesday, the well was under control. [SEP] picture by ESandH [SEP] At 0715 on Monday, August 15, well head in the Pass A Loutre Wildlife Management Area blew out, spewing crude oil and natural gas into the surrounding freshwater marsh. The spill, from Enervest Well #501, is located at 29d 05???€?45???€?N, 089d 10???€?09???€?W has released approximately 50 bbls of oil. By early afternoon, Monday, some sheen had moved from the immediate area and out thru Dennis Pass into the Gulf of Mexico, but most of the oil was contained in the marsh, much of it in two different pockets approximately 200 yards by 150???€?. Some of the oil is stuck in the bordering Roseau cane. From the Tuesday morning briefing, it was discussed that the well-head is still leaking, but workers are on-scene today to secure the well, which is spewing mostly natural gas now. There is 2000???€? of boom on scene as well as 5 skimmers. There have been no wildlife injuries reported, but rehab teams are on stand-by. Hazing will occur at night. Members of the USCG, LA DEQ, and LADWF are on scene with the OSRO. The NOAA SSC will continue to aid the state trustees and USCG and closely monitor the situation. [SEP] courtesy ESandH. As of Tuesday around 1000 the well had been controlled. [SEP] Picture here of sorbant boom containing a heavy pocket of oil. Not the difference in color above (oily side) and below (clean side). [SEP] This picture shows an area near the roseau cane with water hyacinth surrounded by weathering oil. [SEP] A Hotline has been created to capture information related to the Dennis Pass Wellhead Blowout, LA incident. [SEP] Picture of Roseau Cane taken immediately behind the leak source. This is the hardest hit area of cane. [SEP] Members of the USCG, NOAA, LADWF, and representatives of the RP conducted an overflight on Tuesday afternoon. Though some progress was made in the contaminated zone, there was still heavy sheening visible throughout the site as well as black oil and emulsified oil in various locations, especially in the area near the spill source. Draft documents of a "When Clean is Clean" and an oil impact map (approved by the RP) will be produced and given to the trustees. The NOAA SSC continues to support the USCG with the spill. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area, LA I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 15 August 2005. Information in this report is based on the assumption that an estimated 50 bbl of a condensate/crude oil mix was released into Dennis Pass (29&#8734;05???€?45???€? N, 89&#8734;10???€?09???€?W). II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area in the vicinity of Dennis Pass. This report does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for spill location information. III. Shoreline Resources at Risk Habitats in the area are predominantly freshwater marsh. There are four small sand beach islands in Garden Island Bay, and a few other sand beaches, wave-cut platforms in clay, and sheltered tidal flats along Garden Island Bay. III. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Piping plover (federally threatened) may be present approximately 4 miles from the release site on beaches in Garden Island Bay and East Pass. These islands are within the Designated Critical Habitat boundaries as defined by the USFWS. Loggerhead (federally and state threatened) and Kemp???€?s ridley (federally and endangered) sea turtles may be present in Gulf waters in low concentrations. Gulf sturgeon (federally and state threatened) may be present in inland waters.  Other Birds Three colonial waterbird rookeries containing egrets, herons, and ibises occur approximately 2-3 miles from the release site. Nesting activities for most species have likely concluded by August, but young may be present in the area. Mottled duck (3-18 ind/mi2) may be nesting in freshwater marshes. Shorebirds may be migrating through the area. Fish Largemouth bass are present in low concentrations (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles) in freshwater marshes. Atlantic croaker (larvae and juveniles, abundant), black drum (larvae and juveniles, common), gulf menhaden (juveniles, highly abundant), red drum (larvae and juveniles, common), sand seatrout (juveniles, abundant), sheepshead (juveniles, common), silver perch (juveniles, common), southern flounder (juveniles, common), spot (juveniles, highly abundant), spotted seatrout (juveniles, common) are present in inland waters in August. Larvae and juveniles are particularly sensitive to the toxic components of oil. Inverts Blue crab (eggs, larvae, and juveniles, highly abundant), brown shrimp (larvae and juveniles, abundant), gulf stone crab (juveniles, common), pink shrimp (larvae and juveniles, common), and white shrimp (larvae and juveniles, common) are present in inland waters in August. Gulf of Mexico estuaries provide Essential Fish Habitat (EFH) for brown shrimp, white shrimp, red drum, Spanish mackerel, cobia, and bluefish. Reptiles and Terrestrial Mammals Alligators may be nesting and hatching in freshwater marshes. Small furbearers are present in marshes. Marine Mammals Bottlenose dolphins may be present in the area. IV. Human-Use The release site is within Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area. [SEP] sections of water hyacinth in the marsh with recoverable oil.
The NOAA SSC was contacted in regards to a 4000-gallon spill of calciumchlorides 32% solution.   The solution was spilled in to a storm water sewerdrain.  The drain was approximately 2 miles from Lake Michigan.     The USCGFOSC wanted information on the potential impacts from dilute calcium chloridesolution on the biota in Lake Michigan.    The local fire department waspreparing to flush the storm drain with copious amounts of water.The local fire department ultimately flushed the drain with 3000 gallons ofwater per minute for 3 hours.    The flushing water entered the drain at threedifferent locations on the run to the lake.   The drain entered the lake in anopen area, which would allow for maximum dilution.The USCG reported no impacts from the flushing of the CaCl to Lake Michigan. [SEP] Lake Michigan pipe release of Calcium chloride Storm drain with Calcium chloride (CaCl2) in 35% solution (350,000 ppm): The specific gravity of the calcium chloride solution (35%) is 1.35 relative to freshwater, so the product will sink (on the order of minutes) as it is released from the pipe. Resources at Risk: Freshwater species, including perch. Resources at risk will be those that are in the deeper areas of the Lake. Aquatic toxicity of Calcium Chloride for freshwater species include: &#8721; juvenile bluegill 96 hr LC50 is 8 ppt (8,000 ppm)(ECOTOX). &#8721; freshwater snails 48 hr LC50 3 ppt. (3,000 ppm) Recommendations: The product in the pipe should be diluted before discharge, if possible. To dilute the 4,000 gallons to below an action level of 3 parts per thousand would require that the concentrated solution be diluted and mixed with greater than 400,000 gallons of water. Injection of freshwater should occur at as many points along the route of the storm drain as possible to help the final dilution out the end of the storm drain pipe into the lake. This would help mix and dilute the salt and reduce the concentration measured at the outfall to the lake and minimize exposure of wildlife to high salt concentrations. An underwater diffuser pipe at the end of the discharge would further dilute the solution. If the only means of removing the product is by releasing it to the environment at its original strength, any efforts to increase the rate of mixing once the solution reaches the lake would be helpful. [SEP] At 1230 the NOAA SSC was contacted in regards to a 4000-gallon spill of calcium chlorides 32% solution. The solution was spilled in to a storm water sewer drain. The drain was approximately 2 miles from Lake Michigan. The USCG FOSC wanted information on the potential impacts from dilute calcium chloride solution on the biota in Lake Michigan. The local fire department was preparing to flush the storm drain with copious amounts of water. See the CaCl Michigan document provided by Seattle HAZMAT for information on the impacts to biota. The local fire department ultimately flushed the drain with 3000 gallons of water per minute for 3 hours. The flushing water entered the drain at three different locations on the run to the lake. The drain entered the lake in an open area, which would allow for maximum dilution. A follow-up call was placed to the USCG on Tuesday. The USCG reported no impacts from the flushing of the CaCl to Lake Michigan. [SEP] A hotline has been opened for a calcium chloride spill into a storm drain that flows into Lake Michigan near Kenosha, Wisconsin
On, or before 26 July 2005, the F/V Shirley Girl struck an object in OysterBayou (a small bayou that connects to the Gulf of Mexico in coastal Louisiana)causing it to sink and ground on an oyster reef. The USCG requested NOAA assistance to assessresponse trade-offs. [SEP] The NOAA SSC attended a meeting with the RP and the USCG. The result was a decision to develop a salvage plan. There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. [SEP] Resources at Risk (RAR) Near Oyster Bayou, Louisiana Last Updated: August 2, 2005 Area of Interest The F/V Shirley Girl was reported holed and grounded within Oyster Bayou, Louisiana. Active oyster lease sites are reported in the area, and the vessel is thought to be resting on a hard oyster-reef structure. Shoreline and Coastal Resources The shoreline habitat west of the Oyster Bayou consists of predominately gravel (shell-hash) beaches along with mixed sand and shell beaches. The shoreline east of the bayou consists of mixed sand and shell-hash beaches, exposed wave-cut platforms, scarps and steep slopes in clay. On the east side of the inlet to the bayou there is an area of sheltered tidal flats and vegetated low banks. The coastal habitat is almost entirely salt marsh; approximately 1.5 miles east of the Oyster Bayou, there is brackish marsh on Point Au Fer Island. Biological Resources Bird Species The lesser scaup may be found in the GOM October through March. Along the shoreline the gull-billed and the least tern (Mar. ???€? Oct.) may be present. In the salt marsh the following species may be found: American coot (Oct. - Mar.); American wigeon and gadwall (Oct. through Apr.); blue-winged teal (Sep. - Jun.); canvasback, lesser scaup, red-necked duck and hooded merganser (Nov. - Mar.); green-winged teal and northern shoveler (Sep. - Apr.); and northern pintail (Sep. - Mar.). The mottled duck may be found year round. Fish, Reptile and Invertebrate Species There are numerous oyster reef/leases in Oyster Bayou and the southern portion of Fourleague Bay. In the GOM adjacent to the site, the following fish species may be found: black drum, Florida pompano, Gulf menhaden, red drum, sheepshead, southern flounder, Spanish mackerel, spotted seatrout, striped mullet and tarpon. The Gulf sturgeon, a federally endangered specie, may also be found. Brown, pink and white shrimp as well as blue, Florida, and Gulf stone crab are invertebrate species that may be present. In addition to the fish species found in the GOM, the following species may be found in the inland waters of Oyster Bayou: Atlantic croacker, bay anchovy, crevalle jack, gizzard shad, gray snapper, sand seatrout, and silver perch. Also in the inland waters the following invertebrates may be present: bay squid, blue crab and Gulf stone crab, and brown, pink and white shrimp. The American alligator may be found in the salt marshes. Mammals The common raccoon, mink, muskrat, northern river otter, and nutria may all be found present in adjacent salt marsh and inland waters. [SEP] On, or before 26 July 2005, the F/V Shirley Girl struck an object in Oyster Bayou (a small bayou that connects to the Gulf of Mexico in coastal Louisiana) causing it to sink and ground on an oyster reef. The object that was struck was reported to be unknown. NOAA Chart 11356 identifies a pipe obstruction within the area where the accident was reported to have occurred, but the actual cause is still being investigated. The fishing vessel was carrying 300 gallons of diesel fuel. Sheens were initially observed at the vessel, but have ceased. The tank is not thought to be damaged, but some fuel was thought lost by water displacement through the vent system. How much fuel remains is unknown. The owner has no money to remove the vessel or remove the pollution threat. Since the vessel is resting on sensitive habitat with the potential to release fuel and contaminate the oyster beds, the USCG has decided to consider removing the wreak ???€? the fuel oil cannot be removed without rolling the vessel and partially lifting it. Releasing the vessel once the fuel oil is removed would cause additional injury and there is concern that the vessel position may move during a storm and block the waterway. The USCG requested NOAA assistance to assess response trade-offs. A dive survey is planned for today. [SEP] The attached photograph shows the 45 foot fishing vessel on her side in oyster bayou. A light diesel sheen can also be seen. This photograph was provided by the USCG. [SEP] Chart showing the location of vessel. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the F/V Shirley Girl which was holed, grounded and sunk in the vicinity of Oyster Bayou, Louisiana.
The F/V Royal Quarry grounded with 1000gal of diesel on board against the south side of the south jetty of the Columbia River at 0230 on 23 July. The fuel was removed without significant loss and the vessel was refloated at 1600 on 23 July without breaching the hull. [SEP] The F/V Royal Quarry grounded with 1000gal of diesel on board against the south side of the south jetty of the Columbia River at 0230 on 23 July. The fuel was removed without significant loss and the vessel was refloated at 1600 on 23 July without breaching the hull. NOAA Hazmat provided weather, tides, currents, river flow, and diesel fuel information and expected trajectory in the event of catastrophic release. There will be no further entries for this incident. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the grounded fishing vessel Royal Quarry.
At least two shrimp boats have been reported in distress or have grounded offthe South Texas Coast in the wake of Hurricane Emily. The GOLDEN DRAGON wasin-tow, but had to be abandoned due to increasing winds and heavy waves thenight of 19 July. [SEP] TGLO reported that salvage perations commenced 0600 Saturday morning and the Golden Dragon was in deep water and en route, under her own power, by 1030. She departed under escort by the salvage vessel and reached port approximately 1400. The The only issue remaining concerns the removal of a frac tank with 12500 gallons of diesel from the LaPlaya gas well just north of the National Seahore. The owner has been briefed as to removal requirements including the request to move the tank out of the area ASAP. This is the final report. Photographs will be added. [SEP] Initial Report (21 July 2005) At least two shrimp boats have been reported in distress or have grounded off the South Texas Coast in the wake of Hurricane Emily. The GOLDEN DRAGON was in-tow, but had to be abandoned due to increasing winds and heavy waves the night of 19 July. An anchor was set before the vessel was abandoned, but the line parted during the night or next morning. At 1300 hrs on 20 July, the GOLDEN DRAGON reported adrift approximately 1.5 miles off the Padre Island National Seashore, and was expected to strand on the shoreline that evening. The GOLDEN DRAGON, a steel hulled fishing vessel, was reported to be carrying 20,000 gallons of diesel. At that time, not much could have been done given the post tropical storm sea state (plus 10 foot seas and 25 knot winds), but the USCG was monitoring the situation and had planned a response when conditions allowed. That was yesterday afternoon. Last evening, the GOLDEN DRAGON stranded aground just off the beach and between two nearshore bars along the North Beach of Padre Island National Seashore. At present, the vessel is not leaking any fuel. When the sea state lessens, the current plan would lighter 15,000 gallons of the 20,000 gallons of diesel from shore. The hope is that the owner will be able to restart the engines and salvage her with a little help. To achieve that, they may have to hydraulically flush sand from around the hull and cut through one of the nearshore bars. Given the dynamic changes that are constantly occurring on such sand beaches, the effects would be very limited and any scaring would quickly fill in. There are no sea grass beads or reef structures at this location. Given that the sea state and surf are not expected to subside to working conditions until Saturday, the response plan may require changes as conditions change. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator has also provided scientific support consultation to the Chief Ranger of the National Seashore. This information will be updated as the situation changes. [SEP] Update (21 July 2005 PM) Comments and recommendations provided to the Chief Ranger, Padre Island National Seashore associated with the salvage of the GOLDEN DRAGON: The disturbed area should be kept to a minimum area and depth. Continue to watch out for the presence of sea turtles or marine mammals in the area. If sea turtles are observed, take appropriate precautions. Removing as much fuel as possible both lightens the vessel and reduces the risk from pollution. Dispersed fresh diesel is highly toxic to marine environment. Plans are to begin lightering this evening if conditions allow. Salvage may not began until the weekend. Potential for Damage to Nearshore Subtidal Sand Habitats from the Removal of Grounded Vessels off the Gulf of Mexico (Provided by Dr. Jacqui Michel, RPI Inc under contract to NOAA) Offshore sand habitats are highly dynamic, particularly the nearshore bars. During storms, sand is eroded from the beach and deposited in offshore bars, then returned to the beach in the post-storm recovery period. There are usually three bars off Padre Island, with the outer bars being more stable, compared to the inner bars. These nearshore bar habitats are important areas for certain types of fish and shellfish. Fish feed in between the bars where the sediments are more stable and have higher concentrations of infauna. Sea turtle juveniles may be present. Dredging of sand from around the vessel will have direct impacts where the sand and any associated infauna are disturbed. Recovery rates for infauna in these environments are high, particularly in offshore areas where there are large sources of recruitment. Recovery of estuarine sand benthos after dredging is usually within one year. Offshore, and during flushing rather than dredging, the recovery rate should be even faster. There should be no significant changes to sediment transport processes or patterns. If the flushing does create a break in the outermost offshore bar, it should fill quickly (within days). A break in the landward bar might cause some short-term beach erosion where higher waves could break directly on the beach. [SEP] Shown is a photomap with the current location of the GOLDEN DRAGON shown. This photomap document was provided by TGLO. [SEP] Note: During the night, the vessel passed over the nearshore bars and is ashore as shown in the photomap provided by TGLO. This correction was not made in the previous update. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the F/V Golden Dragon which is adrift off Padre Island, TX.
On Wednesday morning, 20 July 2005, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator wasnotified of a grounded 690 foot, single hulled, Integrated Tank Barge atcoordinates 29° 37.80'N by 93° 49.34' W. [SEP] Initial Report On Wednesday morning, 20 July 2005, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a grounded 690 foot, single hulled, Integrated Tank Barge at coordinates 29?? 37.80'N by 93?? 49.34' W. This position places the vessel near the entrance to Sabine Pass, Texas. The ITB MOBILE was reported to be carrying 289,000 bbls of gasoline and 48,000 bbls of diesel fuel when it ran aground on a sand bar just outside of the Sabine Bank Channel (the cause of the grounding is still under investigation). At last report, there was no loss of product. MSO Port Arthur requested that NOAA provide a potential spill trajectory and weather forecast. In addition, a Resource at Risk (RAR) summary was provided. At last report, the vessel was unable to pull itself off during the current high tide. A salvage plan is currently being developed that would probably require a lightering operation when the sea state lessons. At present, the sea conditions are fairly rough due to the effects of Hurricane Emily that came ashore in Northern Mexico. A summary of the forecasted weather, potential spill trajectory, and RAR are posted. This information will be updated is required. [SEP] A total of 90,000bbls of gasoline was lightered from the ITB Mobile beginning 22 July. On Monday, 25 July, the vessel was successfully removed from the sand and mud where she had grounded last week. There was no report of pollution. [SEP] ITB MOBILE, SABINE PASS, TX 1100 CDT, Friday July 22, 2005 Sunset (7/22): 2014 Sunrise (7/23): 0630 Sunset (7/23): 2014 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 5 knots. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Saturday, scattered showers and thunderstorms are predicted in the region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, partly cloudy skies are expected. _________________________________ Seas: Today through Saturday, the seas are expected to be 1-2 feet near the entrance to Sabine Pass _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the low to mid 90???€?s with lows in the upper 70???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5 knots. Cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Seas are predicted too be 1-2 feet. Monday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5 knots. Cloudy skies. Diminishing showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Seas are predicted too be 1-2 feet. Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5 knots. Cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Seas are predicted too be 1-2 feet. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the grounded integrated tanker-barge ITB Mobile outside Sabine Pass, TX. [SEP] Update 21 July 2005 Little has changed since yesterday. The vessel owner has hired a salvage company to refloat the ITB MOBILE. They are working on a plan for salvage currently. The earliest a barge can arrive to begin lightering is tomorrow afternoon. There has been some concern related to the ability to maintain the inert gas system due to water intakes being clogged by mud. The USCG Strike Team has arrived on-scene to assist the MSO during the salvage operation. At present, the NOAA SSC is providing support remotely, but will respond on-scene should the situation change. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Texas Point and McFaddin Beach  I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 20 July 2005. Information in this report is based on the assumption that an ITB vessel with an estimated 289,000 bbls of gasoline and 48,000 bbls of diesel fuel grounded at approximately 29&#8734;37.8???€? N, 93&#8734;49.34???€? W off of Sabine Pass. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers the Gulf coast from Texas Point to the western edge of McFaddin NWR and offshore approximately two nautical miles. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual oil locations. Please consult other Hotline reports for current information. III. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline in the area is primarily composed of scarps and steep slopes in clay near Texas Point NWR and mixed sand and gravel beach near McFaddin NWR with smaller areas of tidal flats, exposed riprap (the jetties), salt and brackish marsh, and fine-grained sand beach throughout the area. IV. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Loggerhead (state endangered and federally threatened) and Kemp???€?s ridley (state and federally endangered) sea turtles may be present in low concentrations in Gulf waters. Brown pelicans (federally endangered) are nesting along the shoreline and are present in Gulf waters. Osprey (state species of special concern) are present in McFaddin NWR. Other Birds Mottled duck, least tern, black skimmer, and clapper rail may be nesting in Texas Point NWR. Additional species present in the wildlife refuges at this time of year include wading birds, cormorants, gulls, and terns. Migratory shorebirds begin arriving in August. Along the shoreline south of Salt and Fence Lakes and in McFaddin NWR, nesting species include: clapper rail, sandwich tern, least tern, willet, and royal tern. Fish and Invertebrates Adults, and in some cases larvae and juveniles, of the following species are present in the area: gulf menhaden, sheepshead (larvae/juveniles), sand seatrout (larvae/juveniles), gafftopsail catfish (spawning adults/larvae/juveniles), hardhead catfish (spawning adults/larvae/juveniles), Spanish mackerel, silver seatrout, Atlantic croaker (larvae/juveniles), spot, Florida pompano, red drum, spotted seatrout (spawning adults/larvae/juveniles), gulf kingfish, white mullet, tarpon, sharks, southern kingfish, blue crab (spawning adults/larvae/juveniles), brown shrimp, and white shrimp (spawning adults/larvae/juveniles). Larvae and juveniles are particularly sensitive to the toxic components of light oil. Essential fish habitat (EFH) occurs in the area for brown shrimp, white shrimp, red drum, Spanish mackerel, cobia, and bluefish. Marine Mammals Bottlenose dolphins are present, mating, and calving in the area. V. Human-Use Resources Texas Point and McFaddin National Wildlife Refuges are present along the shoreline. There is a beach access point near Sea Rim Estates and a heliport in McFaddin NWR. [SEP] ITB MOBILE, SABINE PASS, TX 1100 CDT, Wednesday July 20, 2005 Sunset (7/20): 2015 Sunrise (7/21): 0628 Sunset (7/21): 2015 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E to SE at 10-15 knots. Tonight through Thursday, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Thursday, scattered showers and thunderstorms are forecast in the region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Thursday, cloudy skies are expected. _________________________________ Seas: Today, the seas are expected to be 6 feet near the entrance to Sabine Pass. Tonight through Thursday, the seas are predicted to be 4 feet near the entrance to Sabine Pass. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the low to mid 90???€?s with lows in the upper 70???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 10-15 knots. Cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Seas are predicted too be 2-3 feet. Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 10-15 knots. Cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Seas are predicted too be 2-3 feet. Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 10-15 knots. Cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Seas are predicted too be 2-3 feet.
The night of July 2, 2005 a 145 foot NOAA chartered vessel, the M/V Casitas, ran aground in the Northwest Hawaiian islands. The Casitas is hard aground on the northeast side of Pearl and Hermes Atoll at coordinates 2757.694 N and 17546.282 W. Sea conditions are 4-6 foot south swell with 15-20 knot winds. The vessel is carrying 16 marine debris divers plus crew for a Marine Debris recovery mission. All passengers and crew are reported safe with no injuries. The vessel contains approximately 30,000 gallons of diesel fuel, 3000 gallons of gasoline, and 200 gallons of lube oil aboard. A morning overflight by the USCG C-130 Hercules observed rainbow sheen from the aft portion of the vessel moving southwest, approximately a half nautical mile long by 200 feet wide. [SEP] Crews aboard the M/V Casitas have completed the lightering of the gasoline, using Option No. 3 of the approved Lightering Annex to the SSWP. The transfer of the product was carried out successfully without incident. The vessel is being prepared for removal from the reef, with the revised extraction date now given as 04 August at high tide (1600 hours local). The vessel will be towed by the M/V American Quest to the emergency disposition site approved by Unified Command, should the need arise to utilize this location. All loose materials, trash and related are being stowed below decks and will be secured prior to the extraction of the vessel. All remaining equipment on the deck will be stowed and secured prior to extraction on Thursday. The vessel will be uniformly de-ballasted near low tide with tow made up for the extraction. Once the tow is secured to the M/V American Quest, the vessel will be removed from the reef at, or near high tide, Thursday afternoon. The RP will try to schedule a charter to begin demobilizing personnel from Midway Saturday afternoon. The charter, if finalized, will have the capability of seating up to 12 people for the pre-assessment trip to Midway (where the M/V Condor will meet the investigation team) on Saturday morning, should this agree with everyone's respective schedules. If successful with the charter, the RP will email the Unified Command to apprise them of the time and location. NOAA Weather Service continues to provide site-specific weather forecasts, with special attention to swell conditions. NOAA ORR continues to provide remote support and to participate in plannning damage preassessment activities. [SEP] Situation Update 7/26/05 The M/V Casitas remains hard aground on the north side of Pearl and Hermes Atoll. The vessel is reported to be stable and taking the weather well. The American Quest is on-scene at Pearl and Hermes Atoll conducting surveillance on the Casitas until other salvage vessels arrive. The new salvage master, Gary Sause, departed for Midway today after being fully briefed by the outgoing salvage master, the salvage contractor and RP representatives. The extraction group is scheduled to leave Midway tomorrow morning and is anticipating a 26 to 30 hour transit to Pearl Hermes. ETA at Pearl Hermes is 1200 28 July. NOAA ORR continues to provide remote support and the National Weather Service continues to provide site-specific weather updates. Weather is expected to remain favorable for the next few days. [SEP] Situation Update ???€? The M/V Casitas remains hard aground on the north side of Pearl and Hermes Atoll, with 30,000 gallons of diesel, 1850 gallons of gasoline in 50 gallon drums in a forward container, and 1900 gallons of lube oil onboard. Collected marine debris nets are in the starboard cargo hold. The Unified Command continues to employ a phased approach to lighter and extract the vessel from the reef. ???€? A Coast Guard C-130 conducted an overflight this morning and there has been no discernable sheen on the water. Daily C-130 overflights will be discontinued now that the Walnut is on-scene. C-130???€?s will fly over the grounding site and make observations whenever they fly to and from Midway Island on other missions. Recent Homelands Security demands have reduced the availability of C-130s for response operations. ???€? USFWS monitors and staff from the NOAA monk seal camp at Pearl and Hermes report that no oiled wildlife has been observed to date at the grounding site or other refuge islands. ???€? The USCG Cutter Walnut arrived on-scene this morning with 3 Pacific Strike Team personnel and 2 Refuge USFWS monitors. The Walnut will start lightering operations tomorrow, with a targeted completion by July 11. The American Quest will assist with lightering operations when it arrives on- scene tomorrow afternoon. The owners of the Casitas have hired a dive company to conduct hull assessments. Loose gear on the deck was moved to an established container today. ???€? The 240???€? barge from Alaska and the 140???€? barge from Hawaii are both expected to arrive on-scene on July 14. ???€? The remoteness of the grounding location continues to present significant logistical challenges for operations and observations and to strain the limited resources on the Midway Island Refuge. NOAA Activities ???€? The NOAA Oceania RRT member continues to represent NOAA as a member of the Unified Command. The USFWS Northwest Hawaiian Islands Refuge Manager has also been included in the Unified Command. ???€? The NOAA Oceania RRT member and the SSC participated in a 1 pm press conference today, along with other members of the Unified Command. ???€? Environmental protection measures to prevent wildlife disturbance and other impacts during lightering and extraction operations were finalized and sent to the crews of the Walnut and American Quest. ???€? NOAA is helping identify potential vessel scuttling sites, in the event the vessel must be scuttled after extraction. ???€? NOAA participated in discussions of logistics for potential preassessment activities with representatives of the responsible party, Hawaii DLNR, and USFWS. NOAA ORR Personnel On-Scene: Ruth Yender (arrived today). [SEP] The M/V Casitas remains hard aground, stable and taking weather well. The extraction flotilla arrived @ Pearl Hermes at 2230 hours on 28 July and took anchorage for the evening. The M/V American Contender and the AWB 240 barge began positioning operations at first light on 29 July and are presently anchored approximately 200' from the M/V Casitas. The weather conditions (and forecast) have deteriorated to the point that the gasoline removal and lightering probably will not occur until conditions improve, currently forecast for Monday or Tuesday of next week. A boarding crew assessed the conditions onboard the Casitas and have reported that the drums of gasoline remain secure inside the forward aft storage container and that the vessel itself remains stable. As sea state has caused a delay in removal of the gasoline, efforts have been re-directed to dive assessments of the hull and establishing a messenger wire to the vessel to transfer tools and equipment. Safety remains the highest priority during the course of all site operations. NOAA Oceania RRT representative, John Naughton, is providing guidance at the Command Post in Honolulu. NOAA ORR continues to provide remote support. NOAA National Weather Service continues to provide site-specific weather forecasts, including special swell assessment. [SEP] Photo of lightering of diesel fuel from M/V Casitas to USCG Cutter Walnut. [SEP] Crews aboard the AWB 240 have transferred pumps, compressors and related equipment to the deck of the M/V Casitas. Personnel have removed all life rafts and have collected the majority of the NOAA equipment and gear (from the inventory provided by NOAA) and have are in the process of removing this gear to the AWB 240 and securing same. The weather is reported as too rough to remove the gasoline but the weather is expected to improve by late Monday or Tuesday. A preliminary dive survey has been completed and the results of the dive survey appear positive as to the best extraction path that minimizes damage to the reef. A full survey will be performed prior to the pull to finalize the extraction path. The AW 240 will winch closer to the M/V Casitas and, with improving weather, may be able to get alongside the vessel. This would greatly facilitate the lightering operation as Option No. 1 (removal by crane of the gasoline drums secured inside the container) would be used. The boarding crew is in the process of patching leaks in the vessel's compartments. NOAA National Weather Service daily forecasts continue to support salvage planning and implementation. [SEP] Situation Update 7/20/05 The M/V Casitas remains hard aground on the north side of Pearl and Hermes Atoll. The M/V American Emerald with the 140 barge in tow arrived at Midway 0800 today. The M/V Condor ETA Midway is 21 July 1200 hours. The revised Extraction Plan was delivered to the Command Post this afternoon and will be distributed Friday. Air Operations at Barber's Point was able to accommodate the cargo requested by AMC/USF&W and was delivered last night to Midway. The M/V American Quest plans to leave Midway tonight and return to Pearl Hermes to continue monitoring the M/V Casitas. ETA is early morning tomorrow. The C-130 flight (and return)
Between 1615 and 1700 CDT approx. 60 gallons of oil were released from apipeline within Breton Sound Block 28.  The coordinates of the release are 29&#730; 33’ 40”N, 089&#730; 08’ 36”W.  The slick is reported to be moving to the northeast at this time. [SEP] BRETON SOUND #28 OIL SPILL, LOUISIANA 1915 CDT, Monday June 27, 2005 Sunset (6/27): 2000 Sunrise (6/28): 0559 Sunset (6/28): 2001 _______________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: The wind is currently from the E at about 6 knots. Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the ESE at about 10-15 knots, diminishing to 5-10 knots. after midnight. Tomorrow morning the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5-10 knots, moving to be from the S in the afternoon. Wednesday morning, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 knots, remaining that way throughout the day. _______________________________ Waves: The wave forecast calls for waves of 1-2 ft for the next few days. _______________________________ Precipitation: Isolated showers are expected tonight. Tues. and Wed. scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected, with a overall chance of precipitation of about 30%. _______________________________ Extended Forecast: Winds are expected to be from the SW at about 5-10 knots through Saturday. [SEP] A hotline has been opened for a small pipeline release on June 27, 2005, in Breton Sound, Louisiana. [SEP] Date: 1700 CDT June 27, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Breton Sound Block 28 spill, LA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a release of oil from a pipeline in Breton Sound Block 28. These notes are based on the following information: Between 1615 and 1700 CDT approx. 60 gallons of oil were released from a pipeline within Breton Sound Block 28. The coordinates of the release are 29&#730; 33???€? 40???€?N, 089&#730; 08???€? 36???€?W. The slick is reported to be moving to the northeast at this time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds today are currently from the E at 6 knots, forecast to change to be from the ESE at 10-15 knots tonight. Later tonight the winds are expected to be from the ESE at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the SE at 5-10 knots early on Tuesday. During the day on Tuesday the winds are expected to continue to change direction to be from the S at 5-10 knots by tomorrow afternoon and from the SW at 5-10 knots by Wednesday morning. 2) TRAJECTORY The coastal current at this time of year is generally moderate in speed and variable in direction. This idea is supported by the Texas Automated Buoy System ???€?TABS???€? real-time data over the past few days showing similar light and variable currents along the coast of Texas. With the winds moderate to light and changing direction clockwise, the trajectory of the oil is difficult to predict. We expect the predicted winds to protect Breton Island and Grand Gosier Island from oil contacting their shoreline over the next 24 hours. We do not expect the oil to cross Breton Sound and contact any shoreline on the Mississippi Delta over the next 24 hours. The ADIOS prediction indicates approx 38% of the spill remaining after 24 hours, which is 22 gallons if the initial report of 60 gallons is correct. 3) OIL FATE Oil Name = LOUISIANA API = 34.5 Pour Point = -19 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 75 deg F Time of Initial Release = June 27, 1600 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 2.00 bbl ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill bbl percent percent percent 1 2.00 - 30 - 12 - 59 2 2.00 33 18 49 4 2.00 - 35 - 22 - 42 8 2.00 37 24 40 12 2.00 - 37 - 24 - 39 16 2.00 38 24 38 20 2.00 - 38 - 24 - 38 24 2.00 38 24 38 30 2.00 - 38 - 24 - 38 36 2.00 39 24 37 42 2.00 - 39 - 24 - 37 48 2.00 39 24 37 54 2.00 - 39 - 24 - 37 60 2.00 39 24 37 66 2.00 - 40 - 24 - 36 72 2.00 40 24 36 78 2.00 - 40 - 24 - 36 84 2.00 40 24 36 90 2.00 - 40 - 24 - 36 96 2.00 41 24 35 102 2.00 - 41 - 24 - 35 108 2.00 41 24 35 114 2.00 - 41 - 24 - 35 120 2.00 41 24 35 There was no additional support requested by the USCG, and there was no follow up information provided by the USCG. This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. NOAA's support role was limited to remote trajectory support.
During the evening of June 9, 2005 the M/V Sea Astride, a 150 foot Haitian coastal freighter was adrift with no power and taking on water 3/4 miles off Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico. The vessel grounded at 17-59.04N, 067-13.365W in 12-15 feet of water. The vessel remained firmly aground and water entered the vessel's engine room. No pollution has been observed outside of the hull. The vessel is reported to have 2000 gallons of diesel and 250 gallons of lube oil on board. NOAA provided trajectory, weather, oil fate, and resources at risk information for the incident. NOAA coordinated with local resource managers and divers to evaluate potential risk to area natural resources. On 13 July the vessel had been refloated and taken into port in San Juan. Approval to sink the vessel offshore was requested and approved (after most pollution removed. On 26 August 2005, the vessel was towed to deep water and scuttled 12-15 nm northeast of San Juan. [SEP] M/V SEA ASTRIDE, CABO ROJO, PUETO RICO 1545 ADT, Friday June 10, 2005 Sunset (6/10): 2003 Sunrise (6/11): 0652 Sunset (6/11): 2003 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This afternoon through Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the E to SE at 15-20 knots. Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the E to SE at 15-20 knots dropping to 10-15 knots late in the day. _________________________ Waves: Today through Friday, the seas are expected to be 3-5 feet. _________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Friday, showers and thunderstorms are expected in the region. Periods of heavy rain are forecast. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, cloudy skies are expected. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the low to mid 80???€?s to lows in the mid 70???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, E to SE winds at 10-15 knots are expected. Seas 3-4 feet. Cloudy skies. Showers and thunderstorms expected diminishing late in the day. Sunday, E to SE winds at 10-15 knots are expected. Seas 3-4 feet. Cloudy skies. Scattered showers are expected. Monday, E to SE winds at 10-15 knots are expected. Seas 3-4 feet. Cloudy skies. Scattered showers are expected. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the freighter M/V Sea Astride that grounded in the vicinity of Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Potential Grounding of MV Sea Astride at Bahia de Boqueron and Vicinity, Puerto Rico I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 14:30 EST on 6/10/05. Information in the report is based on a potential spill of 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel and 250 gallons of lube oil from the M/V Sea Astride. The vessel is a coastal freighter that is grounded ? mile to 1 mile offshore west of Bahia de Boqueron. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report is Bahia de Boqueron and the surrounding coastal areas. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material Diesel is a light oil product that contains water-soluble and acutely toxic components that could impact water column resources. It is moderately volatile and has a rapid evaporation rate which helps to dissipate the product. Water column impacts would be more likely if diesel is stranded in large amounts near shallow water areas. Water column contamination could potentially be toxic to fish and aquatic invertebrates that reside in the shallow water areas. Diesel oil can spread rapidly into thin slicks, with the possibility of contaminating large areas. Wildlife using the water surface may be at risk of oil contamination. Lubricating oils have low toxicity and are mildly viscous. This oil will smother and coat rather than penetrate substrates. It will be degraded over time by microbes but may accumulate heavily in some areas if trapped by debris. Lubricating oils will likely float on the water surface, unless mixed into the water column from high-energy wave action. This may cause potential impacts to water column and benthic animals, although not severely due to its low toxicity. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shorelines of Bahia de Boqueron are predominantly composed of coarse-grained sand beaches and mangroves. There are also areas of sheltered solid man made structures within the bay. To the north of Bahia de Boqueron, the shoreline consists of mixed sand and gravel beaches and wave-cut platforms. South of Bahia de Boqueron, towards Bahia Salinas, the shoreline consists of fine to medium-grained sand beaches with some pockets of coarse-grained sand beaches, rocky cliffs and/or solid man made structures. The most sensitive habitats in the area are mangroves. Mangroves are highly productive, serving as nursery habitat for many fish and invertebrates, and feeding, nesting, and general-use habitats for wildlife. Marine diesel fuels have high acute toxicity to mangroves, and impacts (yellowing of the leaves) are evident within days to weeks. Mortality of mangrove trees could occur if large amounts of light oils penetrate the sediments. Light fuels may concentrate at the high-tide line where they can penetrate into sediments or wrack/litter. This oil will weather more slowly and could be a source of sheening. V. Biological Resources at Risk Benthic Habitats Seagrass beds are present along the shorelines and shallows within the bay. Seagrass beds in shallow subtidal or intertidal zones could become affected. While there is potential for above ground die-off, it is likely that the plants will recover, as long as oil is not mixed into the sediments. It is possible that fauna hiding or living in the grass will be exposed to and impacted by the oil. There are extensive coral reefs outside of the bay entrance in the intertidal and subtidal areas along the outer coast. Shallow, protected coral reefs may be adversely impacted by diesel. There may be large concentrations of fish and invertebrates associated with these habitats. Fish Numerous species of fish are present throughout the bay and nearshore coastal waters. Reef fish which may be inhabiting the coral reefs surrounding Bahia de Boqueron include: Squirrelfish, trumpetfish, pipefish, scorpionfish, seabass, grouper, tilefish, jack, snapper, grunt, porgy, drum, angelfish, wrasse, parrotfish, and many other assemblages. Several assemblages of pelagic fish may be present in the nearshore waters including: mackerel, barracuda, dolphin, jack, wahoo, tuna, swordfish, billfish, and shark. The mangrove areas within Bahia de Boqueron serve as nursery grounds for several species of fish including snook and tarpon. Impacts to fish from the diesel are expected to be minor unless the diesel accumulates in shallow areas and mixes into the water column. In heavy seas, it is possible that the oil may be mixed into the water column along the outer coast. Fish mortality and sublethal impacts are possible under these conditions. Larval and juvenile fish inhabiting shallow waters, seagrass beds, rocky reefs, or mangrove areas could be vulnerable to spill impacts. Invertebrates Octopus, spiny lobster, and queen conch are common throughout the nearshore waters. Blue land crab and spiny lobster may be present in mangrove areas and/or in the surrounding estuarine waters. Larval and juvenile crabs and lobsters in shallow water areas of the spill zone may experience sublethal and lethal impacts. Birds Birds potentially present in and around Bahia de Boqueron include brown pelican (endangered), seabirds, terns, and various other species. Pelicans are usually at high risk during oil spills, because they spend nearly all their time on the water surface. The threatened least tern may be nesting on beaches in the eastern portions of the bay at this time. In the mangroves, several species of waterfowl and wading birds may be present including: American coot, blue-winged teal, brown pelican (endangered), Caribbean coot (threatened), common moorhen, least grebe (threatened), magnificent frigate bird, pied-billed grebe, ruddy ducks (threatened), white cheeked pintail, yellow-breasted crake. In addition, the endangered yellow-shouldered blackbird is also present within the mangroves and may be nesting at this time. Critical habitat for the yellow-shouldered blackbird exists in the eastern portion of the bay. Other birds such as waterfowl, wading birds, terns, and shorebirds can also be severely impacted by oil in some cases. Waterfowl and wading birds may be directly oiled, and can become oiled on the upper body by coming in contact with oiled vegetation or wrack. Terns may be oiled while capturing fish. Direct oiling of birds reduces the buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by feathers, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Preening of oiled feathers may also result in ingestion of oil resulting in irritation, sickness, or death. Mammals Whales and dolphins are present throughout the coastal waters of the area. Manatees are also present throughout Bahia de Boqueron. The oil could cause irritation to the skin and mucous membranes of marine mammals, and inhalation of vapors may cause irritation of the lungs, as well as have toxic effects. Manatees could accidentally ingest oil trapped within or adhered to submerged vegetation, resulting in sickness or injury. Spill response vessel operators need to be advised that manatees and whales are
MSO Hampton Roads reported that a barge was damaged and had released some several hundred gallons of diesel fuel into the James River near Richmond, VA. Tanks #1 and #2 Port were damaged and each tank had a potential of 5,000 bbls of diesel fuel. The release was reported to be less than 25-30 bbls. Representatives of the RP, VA DEQ, NOAA DAC, EPA, MSO Hampton Roads, F&WS, and Entrix joined in a survey of the one site where the oil had been collected located just east of the site of the grounding. Area impacted in this pond area off of the East Bank of the James River, known locally as the Gravel Pit, total less than an acre. Diesel product was observed along this sheltered shore that once the floating product had been removed, oil soaked woody debris had been removed, that some sorbent material would be maintained on site for several days or weeks until it could be assured that oil sheen from saturated sediments would not escape into the James River. [SEP] BARGE VB53, RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 1830 EDT, Monday May 9, 2005 NOTE: This is a site-specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for the incident site. Sunset (5/9): 2007 EDT Sunrise (5/10): 0605 EDT Sunset (5/10): 2008 EDT 36-Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the E at 5-10 knots. Tomorrow, E winds at 10 knots are forecast. Tomorrow night, SE winds at 5-10 knots are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight, no precipitation is expected. Tomorrow, there is a slight chance of isolated thunderstorms in the afternoon and again later in the evening. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, mostly clear skies are predicted. Tomorrow, partly cloudy skies are forecast. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the upper 70???€?s to lows in the low 50???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday: SE winds at 10 knots are predicted. Mostly cloudy skies are forecast, with a chance of thunderstorms during the day. Thursday: N winds at 15 knots are expected. Mostly cloudy skies are forecast, with a chance of showers. [SEP] Attached to this email is a pdf document showing the location of the grounded VB-53 (37-23.6 and 077-23) on NOAA Chart # 12251. A natural collection point for some of the diesel fuel has been a small pond area east of the grounding site. [SEP] Incident Summary: On the afternoon of 8 May the T/B Vane Brothers (VB) 53 reported hitting a submerged object and released an estimated 25-30 bbls of diesel fuel into the James River. By the morning of 9 May the vessel was stabilized and transfer of the product from #1 and #2 port tanks that were damaged in the grounding continued. NOAA SSC Support Activities: MSO Hampton Roads requested information as to resources at risk with particular attention to the route of the barge from the site of the grounding to the potential offload and repair facility in Kinder-Morgan up-river 5 miles in Richmond, VA. In addition, MSO Hampton Roads requested support for long-range weather forecasts, coordination with Resource Trustees, and analysis of cleanup endpoints for the marsh areas east of the grounding site described as the 'gravel pit' where much of the diesel oil had collected. The NOAA resource at risk summary that was provided generally described potential impacts to a number of spawning / larval species and habitat in the area of the grounding. However, discussions with representatives of Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries and Virginia Marine Resources staff suggested that there were no special environmental areas that would be at increased risk if the T/ B VB 53 was moved up-river 5 miles to the off-load and repair facility. SPECIAL NOTE: VA DGIF reports a bald eagle nest located in between the site of the grounding and the repair location. This nest is located at the following coordinates 37,25,42.4 and 77,24,26.3. This information will be passed to operations staff as part of the planning considerations when the T/B is moved. NOAA site-specific weather from the National Weather Service for Tuesday has easterly winds at 5-10 knots with no participation expected tonight, but a chance of rain during the day. The NOAA extended forecast for Wednesday is for SE winds at 10 knots, mostly cloudy skies, and chance of thunderstorms during the day. On Thursday N winds at 15 knots, mostly cloudy skies, and chance of showers are forecast. SSC Coordination with Trustees: The NOAA SST developed a number of information and status reports, developed location maps for the areas of the grounding and proposed area to which the T/B would be taken for off-load and repair, and posted several clear digital photos of the site of the grounding and the location where most of the oil had been contained in an area called the 'gravel pit.' This information was shared and discussed with Trustees both by using the NOAA Response LINK system and personal phone calls. Virginia's Department of Game and Inland Fisheries (DGIF), Virginia Marine Resources Commission (VMRC), US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), and NOAA's Damage Assessment Center were also provided these situation updates and maps via individual emails and phone discussions. Proposed Activities Tuesday 10 May Anticipate that the T/B VB 56 will be moved to the off-load and repair facility 5 miles up-river at Kinder-Morgan that is located just south of Richmond, VA. Cleanup of floating diesel oil in the cove just east of the grounding site will continue until recoverable oil using vacuum and skimmers is completed. Deployment of hard boom, sorbant boom and pads will continue. The SSC will deploy to the forward command post located at the James River at Osborne Landing. Scheduled to participate on-scene in discussions with the SSC and the response team on cleanup endpoints at the 'gravel pit' will be representatives of NOAA's DAC and USF&WS. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the barge VB53, leaking diesel in the vicinity of Richmond, VA. [SEP] USCG Photo: 0950 on May 9, 2005. Overview of the spill location looking south and downriver. The cove that is visible in this photo has became a natural collection area as a result of high winds on 8 May from the west. [SEP] Correction to my May 8, 2005 18:35 PM EDT: Winds have been high this day from the West. [SEP] Our initial resources at risk summary provides detailed information on potential resources at risk as a result of a release of diesel fuel from the VB-53. Two particular points of concern to the resposne effort is summarized below: 1. There have been no reasons identified to not move the VB-53 from the point where she is grounded to a repair facility some 5 miles upriver at the Kinder-Morgan facility. No areas along this track have been identified that would require special preventative booming strategies to be implemented. 2. The separate resources at risk document clearly identifies a potential risk to spawning fish and habitat in the area of the grounding. The need to stabilize the barge and stopping any further leaks of oil before the barge is moved is a given. Reference direct discussions with VA DGIF staff. 3. The oyster spawn is normally expected in July and August. With almost no oil from this release expected to reach critical spawning areas in the lower James River, and with the spawning season expected much later in the year, no impact on oyster spawning from this incident is expected. Reference direct discussions with VMRC staff. [SEP] 2100 hours 8 May update. MSO Hampton Roads reports that the release from the barge has been stopped. Estimated amount of the loss is given at 1000 to 2000 gallons of diesel. Exact location of this release in the Richmond, VA area has not been obtained. Local winds have been high all this day from the East. MSO Hampton Roads has requested the SSC participate in the response planning process at the Coast Guard Operations Center, Portsmouth, VA beginning tomorrow morning. The planning cycle has been initiated and discussions tomorrow for the planning unit will include assessment of potential impact on environmental resources. GaryO [SEP] Subject: 0800 hours Morning Report Barge VB-53 Aground Richmond, VA The Barge VB-53 remains aground at 37-23.6 and 77-23 in the James River south of Richmond, VA. Tanks #1 and #2 Port have been damaged and each tank has a potential of 5,000 bbls of diesel fuel. The release has been reported to be less than 25-30 bbls. The response organization has been focused on removing diesel fuel from the damaged tanks. Booming has been accomplished and recovery ops are underway. The response organization has and is satisfied with current wx and tide information. Requested information: 1. When the VB-53 is removed from the rocks at the site of the grounding the plan is to move the barge upriver about 5 miles to the Kinder-Morgan repair facility that is just south of the City of Richmond at 37-28.45 and 77-25.25. What anticipated
No details are available at this time. [SEP] Grounding is at the foot of the bluffs. [SEP] -- Stephen Lehmann Scientific Support Coordinator, New England NOAA Office of Response & Restoration 408 Atlantic Ave Boston, MA 02110-3350 U.S.A. steve.lehmann@noaa.gov Voice: 617-223-8016 Fax: 617-223-8013 24 Hr: 206-526-4911 [SEP] Date: 1800 EDT April 29, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Steve Lehmann  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Grounded fishing vessel, Nantucket Island MA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a potential release of marine diesel from a grounded fishing vessel on Nantucket Island. These notes are based on the following information: A fishing vessel with 1,500-3,000 gallons of marine diesel is grounded on the beach by the lighthouse on the eastern side of Nantucket Island. The position is reported to be in an inaccessible location with position 41&#730; 17.0???€? N, 069&#730; 57.9???€?W. The vessel is reported not to be leaking at this time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Today (Friday) winds are from the SW at 12 knots. Later this evening (Friday) at approx. 2200-2300 hours, the winds are expected to shift to be from the S at approx. 8 knots. Early Saturday morning (0400-0500 hours) the winds are expected to be from the SE at 8 knots. Later Saturday morning (0900-1000 hours) winds are forecast to be from the E at 10 knots. By Saturday afternoon, the winds are expected to be from the S at 14 knots with gusts to 22 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY The vessel has 1,500 to 3,000 gallons of diesel on board. An instantaneous release of this oil in the surf zone would be expected to influence less than one nm from the vessel. If the oil were released under onshore wind conditions, we would expect that the oil would experience significant dispersion within the surface, and may be visible less than 1 nm downwind. If the oil were released under wind conditions with an offshore wind component, we would expect oil sheens to be visible less than 1 nm downwind. 3) OIL FATE Diesel Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic then heavier oils. These oils do not generally present an involved cleanup problem. However, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and can persist as a biological threat in low energy marine environments. Oil Name = MARINE DIESEL F-76, MANCHESTER FUEL API = 31.6 Pour Point = 10 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 45 deg F Time of Initial Release = April 29, 1400 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 3,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spil gal percent percent percent 1 3,000 -1 - 3 - 96 2 3,000 2 12 86 3 3,000 -4 - 25 - 71 4 3,000 6 39 55 5 3,000 -7 - 51 - 42 6 3,000 9 59 32 7 3,000 -10 - 66 - 24 8 3,000 10 71 19 9 3,000 -11 - 74 - 15 10 3,000 11 76 12 11 3,000 -11 - 78 - 10 12 3,000 12 80 9 [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information related to the FV Grounding, Nantucket Island, MA incident. [SEP] FISHING VESSEL GROUNDING, NANTUCKET ISLAND, MASSACHUSETTS 1730 EDT, Friday April 29, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for the incident site. Sunset (04/29): 7:54 PM Sunrise (04/30): 6:02 AM Sunset (04/30): 7:55 PM 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today (Friday) winds are from the SW at 12 knots. Later this evening, at approx. 2200-2300 hours, the winds are expected to shift to be from the S at approx. 8 knots. Early Saturday morning (0400-0500 hours) the winds are expected to be from the SE at 8 knots. Later Saturday morning (0900-1000 hours) winds are forecast to be from the E at 10 knots. By Saturday afternoon, the winds are expected to be from the S at 14 knots with gusts to 22 knots. Saturday night, the winds are expected to be from the S at 20 knots, with gusts to 30 knots. _________________________ Waves: Waves are expected to be about 3ft today, increasing tomorrow afternoon to 5-8 ft, and tomorrow night up to 8ft. _________________________ Precipitation: Cloudy today, with some showers forecast for Saturday morning, starting about 0500-0600, and increasing showers Saturday afternoon. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to be in the mid 40s to lower 50s _________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday: The weather is expected to be drying Sunday, becoming partly cloudy with SW winds of 15-20, increasing to 20-25 knots in the afternoon, temperatures in the upper 50s. Monday: There is a chance of showers with winds from the SW at 15-20, with gusts up to 30 knots. [SEP] -- Stephen Lehmann Scientific Support Coordinator, New England NOAA Office of Response & Restoration 408 Atlantic Ave Boston, MA 02110-3350 U.S.A. steve.lehmann@noaa.gov Voice: 617-223-8016 Fax: 617-223-8013 24 Hr: 206-526-4911
On 28 April 2005 at approximately 1530 the USCG Activities NY was notified of a release of gasoline from the barge B-35. The barge was moored at the Dynergy facility in Roseton, NY. It reported slight sheen around it and believed the damage was to the #1 and #2 port tanks (each containing 7,500 barrels of gasoline). ACTNY requested NOAA support for weather and trajectory information. The barge initially had 75,145 bbls of gasoline. Using the figures provided by the RP the amount lost would be 683 bbls or 28,686 gallons. The amount of product and water combined is 89,823 bbls which means that during the several times they lightered they took on an additional 7,803 bbls of water (the barges total capacity is only 82,020 bbls). The barge was single hulled and they believed it sustained an impact with the bottom near Diamond Reef (NE of buoy #56) while heading up river. Weather at time of incident was winds 12 knots from the SW, air temperature 41F, and visibility 10NM. The waterway remained open to all traffic with a Safety Broadcast for no-wake speed in the vicinity of the incident. The contractor conducted air monitoring of LEL and benzene levels. None were detected. Protective boom was deployed at the mouth of Wappinger Creek. [SEP] This afternoon at approximately 1530 the USCG Activities NY was notified of a release of gasoline from the barge B-35. The incident occurred near buoy # 56 in the Hudson River near Wappingers Creek (41 degrees 35.77???€? N / 73 degrees 57.4 W). The barge reported slight sheen around it and believes the damage is to the #1 and #2 port tanks (each containing 7,500 barrels of gasoline). ACTNY requested NOAA support for weather and trajectory information. [SEP] Date: 1830 EDT April 28, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Barge B35, Hudson River, NY. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of Gasoline released from the Barge B35. These notes are based on the following information: At 1530 EDT today (Thursday) there was an accident with the Barge B35 at location 41? 35.77???€?N, 073? 57.4???€?W, near the mouth of Wappinger Creek. Approx. 7,500 bbl of gasoline were released. The Barge was carrying 75,000 bbls of gasoline total. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Currently, there are a series of ???€?dry bursts???€? moving through the area, generating gusts of up to 30 to 40 knots. After about 1800 hrs, winds are forecast to become from the W at 10-15 mph. After midnight, winds further decrease to less than 5 mph. Friday, winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 mph, with some channeling by the river valley, directing the wind to be more from the S. 2) Currents This region of the river is tidally dominated. The river flows are normal for this time of year, so the predicted tidal currents are likely to be accurate. The predicted tidal currents at New Hamburg call for a max ebb of 1.1 knots and a max flood of 0.9 knots on Friday. 3) Oil Fate Under current conditions, most of the 7,500 bbls reported spilled will have evaporated within about 6hrs. If the total volume on the barge were released, less than 10% would remain after about 8 hrs. Gasoline is a light refined product with a specific gravity that can range from 0.76 to 0.70 at 15??C (54 to 70 API). The product typically has a very high evaporation rate and does not tend to create persistent slicks. When spilled, the gasoline spreads quickly into thin films by forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film is common. Normally, this type of release does not become an involved cleanup problem. There is a high flammability hazard associated with gasoline spills. Specifically, if a spill is kept from spreading freely by natural or man-made structures the gasoline slick might be thick enough to support ignition. In addition, vapor concentrations near the source of spill or vapors collected in sheltered areas can present an explosion hazard. Please note that gasoline does have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tends to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. In high-energy environments, the gasoline is likely to disperse as small droplets in the water column. Gasoline spills can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat, particularly in low energy marine environments such as shallow bays and inlets. 4) TRAJECTORY With the tidally dominated currents, the originally reported spill could make it as far upriver from the spill site as 2 nautical miles, and as far downriver as 4 miles within the first 12 hrs. If there were another release tonight or tomorrow, it could travel as far as 4 miles upriver and 5 miles downriver before evaporating. The current winds are gusty and variable in direction, making it hard to predict where the oil might beach. Tonight, the West winds will tend to move the oil toward the Eastern shore, but the river Valley may channel the winds to be more from the south. Tomorrow, the SW and S winds will help to move the oil northward, but could result in shoreline impacts on either shore. Tidal Currents at New Hamburg, HUDSON RIVER, Mid-channel Station No. 3796 Location: 41?? 35.00' N, 73?? 57.00' W Flood Direction: North, Ebb Direction: South Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 04/28/2005 02:14 +1.1 Max Flood Thu 05:08 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 08:38 -1.2 Max Ebb 12:17 +0.0 Min Before Flood 14:55 +0.7 Max Flood 17:34 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 20:51 -0.9 Max Ebb 23:56 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 04/29/2005 03:08 +0.9 Max Flood Fri 06:00 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 09:23 -1.1 Max Ebb 13:20 +0.0 Min Before Flood 15:56 +0.6 Max Flood 18:32 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 21:43 -0.8 Max Ebb [SEP] BARGE B35, HUDSON RIVER, NEW YORK 1700 EDT, Thursday April 28, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for the incident site. Sunset (04/27): 1950 Sunrise (04/28): 0636 Sunset (04/28): 1950 24 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Currently, there are a series of ???€?dry bursts???€? moving through the area, generating gusts of up to 30 to 40 knots. After about 1800 hrs, winds will calm down to be W at 10-15 mph. After midnight, winds will calm down to less than 5 mph. Friday, winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 mph, with some channeling by the river valley, directing the wind to be more from the S. _________________________ Waves: The river will be very choppy for the next hour or so, calming down as the winds recede. _________________________ Precipitation: Today, there will be scattered showers this evening, and into the night. Friday, there is a chance of light rain. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, skies will be partly cloudy. _________________________ Temperatures: This evening, temperatures are expected to be in the mid fifties. Tonight, lows will be in the mid thirties. Tomorrow, highs will be near 60 degrees. [SEP] Date: 1830 EDT April 28, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Barge B35, Hudson River, NY. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of Gasoline released from the Barge B35. These notes are based on the following information: At 1530 EDT today (Thursday) there was an accident with the Barge B35 at location 41? 35.77???€?N, 073? 57.4???€?W, near the mouth of Wappinger Creek. Approx. 7,500 bbl of gasoline were released. The Barge was carrying 75,000 bbls of gasoline total. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Currently, there are a series of ???€?dry bursts???€? moving through the area, generating gusts of up to 30 to 40 knots. After about 1800 hrs, winds are forecast to become from the W at 10-15 mph. After midnight, winds further decrease to less than 5 mph. Friday, winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 mph, with some channeling by the river valley, directing the wind to be more from the S. 2) Currents This region of the river is tidally dominated. The river flows are normal for this time of year, so the predicted tidal currents are likely to be accurate. The predicted tidal currents at New Hamburg call for a max ebb of 1.1 knots and a max flood of 0.9 knots on
At 1313 hrs (CDT) on 28 April 2005, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator wasnotified by the USCG of a collision between an outbound tanker and an OffshoreSupply Vessel (OSV) in the Sabine Ship Channel just N of the jetties. [SEP] At 1313 hrs (CDT) on 28 April 2005, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by the USCG of a collision between an outbound tanker and an Offshore Supply Vessel (OSV) in the Sabine Ship Channel just N of the jetties. The cause of the incident is still under investigation, but the consequence was that the OSV Rene 1 sank. All of the crew were accounted for, but the status of injuries is unknown. Initially, a small sheen was observed threatening Louisiana Point. That sheen quickly dissipated and no addition release was observed. At present, the OSV is capsized and sunk in the channel with only the bow above water. The reported position is 29?? 42.71???€? N Lat. 093?? 50.77???€? W Long. This position places the vessel just N of the jetties and in Sabine Lake. An estimated 4500 gallons of diesel remain on board. Salvage plans are being developed and protection booming is being deployed at Lighthouse Bayou, Texas Bayou, and Louisiana Bayou (a small cut near Louisiana Point). A trajectory analysis is attached. The SSC is on-scene and will continue to support response efforts including coordination of environmental issues during the salvage. Additional information to follow. [SEP] Attached is the NOAA GNOME Trajectory for 29 April 2005. Note, there has been no significant oil release. This document is being used to develop protection plans. [SEP] traj update [SEP] Trajectory Summary FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of diesel and lube oil released from a sunken crew boat. These notes are based on the following information: At 1140 CDT today (Thursday) a tanker and the Crew Boat Rene:1 collided in Sabine Pass. The tanker is reported as not leaking, while the crew boat sank and product is reported on the water. The crew boat is reported to have 5,000 gallons of diesel fuel and 800-1,000 gallons of lube oil onboard. The last reported position of the crew boat is 29&#730; 42.102???€?N, 093&#730; 50.7???€?W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Today, the winds are expected to be from the south at 10-14 knots. Tonight, S-SW winds at 15 knots are predicted. Friday, S-SW winds at 15 knots with gusts to 20 knots are forecast. 2) TRAJECTORY We expect any oil released this afternoon to move into Sabine Pass on the flood tide with the onshore winds. Oil could reach as far as Mesquite Point by early this evening. Because of the wind direction, we expect oil to be more likely to contact the eastern side of Sabine Pass rather than the western shore. As the tide turns late this afternoon, oil continuing to leak from the vessel could move out through the jetties and upcoast in the coastal current. The TABS Buoy R currently shows a weak upcoast coastal flow of 20 cm/s. By tomorrow with the onshore winds and a persistent upcoast flow we expect shoreline contact within 1.5 nm upcoast from the jetties to be the highest probability area. Beached oil could be found as far at 10 nm upcoast from oil that moved into the coastal current. 3) OIL FATE Diesel Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. These oils do not generally present an involved cleanup problem. However, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and can persist as a biological threat in low energy marine environments. [SEP] On Saturday evening, the OSV Rene 1 was lifted from the Sabine Ship Channel and transported to the Sabine Anchorage. The fuel tanks had been plugged prior to this operation, but the large gash in the engine room still presented a pollution threat for oil escapement. Field operations were halted during most of the day due to strong winds that subsided late that afternoon. During the initial lift, only a small amount of diesel (probably slop from the engine room) was lost from the engine room, and only small sheen during the transfer (the sheen were thought to only represent a few gallons of oil). The spilled diesel was blown across the pass toward a small cut and marsh near the Sabine Pilot Station. This area had been boom in anticipation of such a trajectory and minimal impact was observed. Most of the diesel evaporated and naturally dispersed before reaching the shoreline. Approximately a half a bale of saturated pads were collected both on water and at the Pilot Station. Salvage operations will continue with the goal of rotating the capsized vessel pumping water from the vessel and placing it on a barge for final disposition. A containment boom has been configured around the vessel to mitigate additional pollution. Sadly, the Captain of the Rene 1 died of injuries on Saturday. The NOAA SSC demobilized from the scene on Sunday morning since the navigational channel was now open and a sound protection strategy was in place. Photographs will be provided. [SEP] traj update [SEP] traj update [SEP] Shown in the attached photograph is the bow of the Rene 1 (Photograph provided by USCG). [SEP] CREW BOAT RENE 1, SABINE RIVER, LOUISIANA 1030 CDT, Friday April 29, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for the incident site. Sunset (04/29): 1951 Sunrise (04/30): 0633 Sunset (04/30): 1952 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the S-SW at 15 knots with gusts to 25 knots. Tonight, SW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted to shift and be from the W-NW at 10-15 knots by the late evening hours. Saturday, north winds at 15 knots are forecast to decrease to 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. _________________________ Waves: Today through Saturday, seas inside the jetty are expected to be 2-3 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Today, there is a slight chance of showers. Tonight, chance of an isolated thunderstorm. Saturday, dry weather is expected. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through tonight, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Saturday, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 60???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday: The winds are expected to be from the east at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Seas 2 feet. Mostly sunny skies. Dry. Monday: SE winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas 2 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Tuesday: East winds at 10 knots are forecast. Seas 2 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Chance of isolated showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] A Hotline has been started to capture information for the Crew Boat Rene I, Sabine Pass, LA incident.
Unknown quantity of unknown substance IVO Sierra Alpha Buoy near Admiralty Inlet. No response. [SEP] USCG asked NOAA HAZMAT for assistance in determining the origin of at least one mystery sheen in the vicinity of Admiralty Inlet near Port Townsend, WA. This provided, no other information or action is required. Please see other reports in this section for further details if required. [SEP] MYSTERY SPILL, PORT TOWNSEND, WASHINGTON 1500 PDT, Tuesday April 26, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for the incident site. Sunset (04/26): 2017 Sunrise (04/27): 0559 Sunset (04/27): 2019 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 15-25 knots. Wednesday, north winds at less than 5 knots are predicted. Wednesday night, north winds at 10 knots are forecast to decrease to 5 knots or less by the late evening hours. _________________________ Waves: Tonight, the seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. Wednesday through Wednesday night, the seas are predicted to be 1 foot or less. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Wednesday night, no precipitation is forecast. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Wednesday night, mostly clear skies are expected. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the 50???€?s to lows in the 40???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday: The winds are expected to be from the north at 10 knots shifting to be from the SE at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 1-2 feet. Mostly sunny skies. Dry. Friday through Saturday: The winds are predicted to be from the south at 10-15 knots. Seas 1-2 feet. Mostly sunny skies. Dry. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the mystery spill in Admiralty Inlet, Puget Sound, WA.
A pipeline leak was reported in Barataria Bay, north of Mendicant Island near the eastern edge of Grand Isle, LA. Lat 29d 19’30”N, 089d 58’35”W. The release consisted of roughly 600 bbls of sweet crude oil. [SEP] Morning Update 20 April 05 Late last night oil moved further up into Creole and Hackberry Bays (northward from West Champagne Bay). This is consistant with the predominantly southerly winds. The leak source was clamped and is secure. So far this response has been a joint effort by MSO New Orleans and MSO Morgan City, with NO in the FOSC seat. The reason for this is that the spill is on the NO side, but the oil is actually moving into the Morgan City zone. The USCG is discussing future shoreline impacts and the possibilities of switching the regulating MSO. There is approximately 16,000 feet of boom deployed. Some of the boom closer to the source and in areas where it is less affected is being moved to the north in an effort to collect oil and prevent it from reaching the northern edges of Creole Bay. There are no reported wildlife injuries. An aerial wildlife survey is scheduled for this afternoon. Barataria Pass was recently opened, though vessel traffic is restricted to the channel only. [SEP] Here is a visual layout of what's going on. Oil that went west yesterday is now headed north. Yellow is boom, red is shoreline impact and zone divisions. The blue lines are either Parish or USCG division lines. [SEP] GRAND ISLE PIPELINE INCIDENT, BARATARIA BAY, LOUISIANA 1100 CDT, Thursday April 21, 2005 Sunset (4/21): 1930 Sunrise (4/22): 0627 Sunset (4/22): 1931 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5-10 knots. Friday, the winds are forecast to be from the SE winds at 5-10 knots increasing in the afternoon to be 10-15 knots. Friday evening, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the W at 15-20 knots around midnight. _______________________________________ Waves: Today through Friday, the seas in Champagne Bay are expected to be 1-2 feet. _________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Friday, scattered showers and thunder storms are expected in the region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, partly skies are expected. _________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs near 80 to lows near 60. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, N winds at 20-25 knots are forecast. Seas 2-4 feet. Cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunder storms. Sunday, NW winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Seas 2-4 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Monday, S winds at 10-15 knots are expected. Seas 1-2 feet. Cloudy skies with the chance of scattered showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Attached are a series of field pictures taken on 24 April that show stranded oil and cleanup activities at one location in Creole Bay. [SEP] Attached is the map of the northern section of last evening's overflight. [SEP] Situation on evening of 4/20/05 [SEP] As was mentioned in the previous posting (Continuing Operations) it was decided by the Environmental Unit (EU) that the clean up and demobilizing of operations can continuewith limited involvement on the EU's behalf. This is due to the fact that what was observed by the SCAT teams in the field and by the previous overflights shows that the response was conducted in an appropriate manner and level and can continue to be monitored and demobilized in the same way. After the meeting with SCAT teams and the operationally focused EU members agreed on the revised future booming strategies the trustees met and discussed future action. Following their meeting, the trustees met with representatives of the RP to talk about future plans. Most feedback from the trustees was positive on the issue of them arriving on scene earlier and working alongside SCAT teams in their initial field assessment. Though the actual SCAT that was required from this spill was limited, this situation brought about an opportunity to bring the two groups together to share information. Future plans for operations consist of a once or twice a week visit by members of LADEQ, USCG, or NOAA to check on progress made in the clean-up effort. Passive recovery and demobilization will be the focus for the rest of the spill event. With regards to NOAA personel on-scene, Troy Baker (representing the trustees) was making a field trip with members of the RP out on-scene this morning, but Jim Johnsonne and the SSC departed the spill site last evening. An on-site field trip for next week is being planned. No other requests of the NOAA Scientific Support Team have been made at this time. [SEP] Response Guidelines for Barataria Bay Pipeline Spill 21 April 2005 These guidelines establish practical target end-points for cleanup. The guidelines do not constitute shoreline restoration or full recovery criteria, which will be further addressed through longer-term assessments. The objective of the cleanup criteria is to reduce the risk of environmental injury to the best extent practicable as judged by the professional judgment of the Environmental Unit, approved through Unified Command such that excessive treatment or cleanup may have no net environmental benefit and may delay, rather than accelerate, recovery of the shoreline habitats. General Criteria: ???€? Oiled shorelines shall be free of bulk oil and not produce appreciable sheen under all weather conditions. ???€? There shall be no appreciable floating oiled debris that can be removed by hand. ???€? Oil stain or sporadic coat on vegetation and large immobile debris that does not produce sheen and is not an appreciable contact risk to wildlife may be allowed to weather and degrade naturally. ???€? Some oil stain or coat may still be present if best professional judgment of the Environmental Unit/SCAT determines that further treatment will not produce environmental benefit. Specific Target Cleanup End-Points Fine-Grain Sand Beaches ???€? Oiled shorelines shall be free of bulk oil and not produce appreciable sheen. ???€? Light oil stain or sporadic oil coat on sediment that does not produce sheen and is not likely to result in ???€?asphalt-like conditions???€? may be allowed to weather and degrade naturally. ???€? Some oil stain may still be present at the end of active cleanup if best professional judgment is that further treatment will not produce environmental benefit. Sand beaches are one of the easiest shorelines to clean. Sand removal must be minimized. Material to be removed should be limited to oil, oiled sand, and oiled debris. Do not remove unoiled wrack. Access to upland areas must be restricted to prevent collateral damage. Cleaning by hand, scraping with a shovel and rakes are recommended. Snare and sorbant booms for additional passive recovery is also encouraged. Shell and Mixed Sand & Shell Shorelines ???€? Oiled shorelines shall be free of bulk oil and not produce appreciable sheen under all weather conditions. ???€? Oil stain or sporadic patchy coat on sediment that does not produce sheen and is not likely to result in ???€?asphalt-like conditions???€? may be allowed to weather and degrade naturally. ???€? Some oil stain may still be present, but the best professional judgment is that further treatment will not produce environmental benefit. Consider low pressure, high volume flushing onto free oil from shell into snare and containment boom. Snare should be maintained until the shoreline doesn???€?t create sheen. Minimize any shell removal since these area are primarily fill to fortify shoreline and facility structures. Marshes ???€? The area shall be free of free floating and potentially mobile oil, including oiled debris and wrack on fringe marsh. ???€? There shall be no appreciable sheens released from marsh. ???€? Oil stained and coated vegetation that doesn???€?t create sheen or appreciable wildlife threats may be left to natural recovery. Areas of light oiling will recover naturally. Aggressive cleanup may actually cause greater long-term damage. There shall be no physical cleanup activities in marsh areas unless in a specific area or situation agreed upon by the Environmental Unit and Unified Command. This is to prevent collateral damage to marsh vegetation and entrainment or entrapment of oil product into sediments. Sorbant boom or snare should be staked along the front edge of oiled marsh for passive recovery of sheens. These snares must be inspected and replaced routinely. Best professional judgment by the Unified Command, with input from the Environmental Unit/SCAT groups should be used to determine if further treatment or cleanup would have no environmental benefit and may delay, rather than accelerate, recovery of the vegetation. This judgment should be based on fact, past studies or data from previous oil spills. [SEP] Morning Update 20 April 05 Late last night oil moved further up into Creole and Hackberry Bays (northward from West Champagne Bay). This is consistant with the predominantly southerly winds. The leak source was clamped and is secure. So far this response has been a joint effort by MSO New Orleans and MSO Morgan City, with NO in the FOSC seat. The reason for this is that the spill is on
Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding a mystery spill, offshore, LA. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding a mystery spill, offshore, LA.
The vessel MV Sea Cloud, a 132 foot container ship grounded on coral or hardbottom on the south central coast of St Croix at approximately 0745 local onSaturday 26 March 2005.  CG reported the grounded position is 17-40.7N;064-45.9W. This position is at the Alucroix port channel near the Hovensafacility.  Water depths were reported as 9-4 fathoms, but this is unconfirmed.CG reported they believe the vessel is aground on coral.Fuel on board was initially reported as 500 metric tons of #6 fuel oil.  Thisinformation was later updated to be 180 metric tons of #6 and an unknownquantity of diesel fuel.  The diesel fuel was being transfered to inside tanksfor added security. NOAA provided contingency trajectory information and weather forecasts to the USCG MSD in St Croix.  After lightering the majority of fuel, the vessel was successfully re-floated without incident the morning of March 28 and taken into dock for hull inspection.  There was no significant damage to the hull.NOAA DAC coordiantied with co-trustees to assess damage to the reef grounding site. [SEP] A Hotline has been started to capture information related to the MV Sea Cloud, St. Croix, US Virgin Islands incident. (Please note: due to the power outage in SS and the SSC's inability to use remote dial-in, information regarding the incident will be posted on 3/26/05) [SEP] MV Sea Cloud, St Croix, USVI weather Monday 28 March 2005 M/V SEA CLOUD, ST CROIX, USVI 1530 Monday, March 28, 2005 Sunset (3/28): 18:32 AST Sunrise(3/29): 06:16 AST Sunset (3/29): 18:32 AST _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the E at 10-15 knots. Tuesday the winds are expected to continue from the E at 10-15 knots. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Tuesday, the seas are predicted to be 2-4 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tuesday, 20% chance of isolated afternoon showers is forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tuesday, unlimited visibility except for periods of showers. _____________________________________ Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from a high in the mid to upper 80???€?s to a low in the mid 70's _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday through Friday, the winds are predicted to be from the E at 10-15 knots. Isolated afternoon showers are expected. Mostly sunny skies are forecast. [SEP] MV Sea Cloud, St Croix, USVI [SEP] MV Sea Cloud, St Croix, USVI weather Sunday, 27 March 2005 WEATHER for St Croix I 1900 AST, Saturday March 26, 2005 Sunrise(3/26): 06:17 AST Sunset (3/26): 18:31 AST Observations from St Croix Airport 1800 AST: 11 knots from 080 24 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight: Winds from ENE to NE at 10 - 15 knots Sunday morning: Winds E to ENE at 10 - 15 knots Sunday afternoon: Winds from E to ESE at 10-15 knots Waves: Tonight and Sunday seas 2-3 feet at 6 seconds from 115?? Sunday evening seas 3 -4 feet Precipitation: None for tonight or Sunday Ceiling/Visibility: Unlimited visibility tonight and Sunday Extended Forecast: Continue trade winds thru Tuesday of next week. Winds will be from the ESE to ENE at 10 - 20 knots for the period. [SEP] MV Sea Cloud, St Croix, USVI Trajectory and Oil Fate Info Sunday, 27 March 2005 Date: March 26, 2005 Time: 1915 AST To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential spill from Container Vessel Sea Cloud FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ These notes are based on the following information: A 100???€? container vessel, the Sea Cloud, has gone aground about 1/2 mile offshore of the southern coast of St Croix Island. The location is reported to be 17?? 40.7???€? N by 064?? 45.9???€?W. The vessel has about 180 MT of #6 fuel oil (about 50,000 gallons) onboard. There is no fuel lost at this point. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Trade winds at 10 - 20 knots for at least the next 3 days. Directions will vary between E to NE during evenings and morning Hours. Expect winds to be E to ESE during the afternoon hours. 2) TRAJECTORY Any oil spilled should move primarily to the west along shore. The prevailing coastal current under tradewind conditions is to the W and WSW and with the Easterly trades we would expect the primary movement to be to the West to WSW. During the evening hours winds are expected to be from the ENE to NE due to a landbreeze effect. Any oil spilled during the evening will probably move to the WSW at 1/3 - 1/2 knot. During the afternoon hours winds are expected to be from the ESE due to a sea breeze. This would result in oil moving to the E to ESE which could result in some beach impacts to the west.  3) OIL FATE A viscous oil that will form tarballs that could persist for weeks. Oil Name = FUEL OIL NO.6 API = 12.3 Pour Point = 59 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 80 deg F Time of Initial Release = March 26, 1500 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 180 metric tonnes ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill metric ton percent percent percent 1 180 - 1 - 0 - 99 2 180 2 0 98 4 180 - 3 - 1 - 96 6 180 4 2 94 8 180 - 5 - 3 - 92 10 180 6 4 90 12 180 - 6 - 5 - 88 18 180 7 9 84 24 180 - 7 - 12 - 81 30 180 8 15 78 36 180 - 8 - 17 - 75 42 180 8 19 72 48 180 - 8 - 21 - 70 54 180 9 23 68 60 180 - 9 - 25 - 66 66 180 9 27 64 72 180 - 9 - 29 - 63 78 180 9 30 61 84 180 - 9 - 32 - 59 90 180 9 33 58 96 180 - 9 - 34 - 56 102 180 9 36 55 108 180 - 9 - 37 - 54 114 180 9 38 52 120 180 - 9 - 39 - 51
At about 1955 EST the barge Cold Spring Harbor was holed and released approximately 40,000 gallons of #2 fuel oil. It is reported that a significant amount of the oil has been boomed. The location is in the southern section of Arthur Kill about 2.5 miles from Raritan Bay. This is at Motiva C1 dock in New Jersey. [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL/HEATING OIL NO.2, CHEVRON API = 33.5 Pour Point = 5 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 5 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 40 deg F Time of Initial Release = March 25, 1800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 40,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Remaining Spill gal percent percent 1 40,000 - 0 - 100 2 40,000 0 100 4 40,000 - 0 - 100 6 40,000 1 99 8 40,000 - 1 - 99 10 40,000 2 98 12 40,000 - 3 - 97 18 40,000 7 93 24 40,000 - 10 - 90 30 40,000 13 87 36 40,000 - 16 - 84 42 40,000 18 82 48 40,000 - 21 - 79 54 40,000 23 77 60 40,000 - 24 - 76 66 40,000 26 74 72 40,000 - 28 - 72 78 40,000 29 71 84 40,000 - 31 - 69 90 40,000 32 68 96 40,000 - 33 - 67 102 40,000 34 66 108 40,000 - 35 - 65 114 40,000 36 64 120 40,000 - 37 - 63 Oil Name = DIESEL/HEATING OIL NO.2, CHEVRON API = 33.5 Pour Point = 5 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 5 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 40 deg F Time of Initial Release = March 25, 1800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 20,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Remaining Spill gal percent percent 1 20,000 - 0 - 100 2 20,000 0 100 4 20,000 - 0 - 100 6 20,000 1 99 8 20,000 - 2 - 98 10 20,000 3 97 12 20,000 - 4 - 96 18 20,000 9 91 24 20,000 - 12 - 88 30 20,000 16 84 36 20,000 - 18 - 82 42 20,000 21 79 48 20,000 - 23 - 77 54 20,000 25 75 60 20,000 - 27 - 73 66 20,000 29 71 72 20,000 - 31 - 69 78 20,000 32 68 84 20,000 - 34 - 66 90 20,000 35 65 96 20,000 - 36 - 64 102 20,000 37 63 108 20,000 - 39 - 61 114 20,000 40 60 120 20,000 - 41 - 59 Oil Name = DIESEL/HEATING OIL NO.2, CHEVRON API = 33.5 Pour Point = 5 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 5 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 40 deg F Time of Initial Release = March 25, 1800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 10,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Remaining Spill gal percent percent 1 10,000 - 0 - 100 2 10,000 0 100 4 10,000 - 1 - 99 6 10,000 2 98 8 10,000 - 3 - 97 10 10,000 5 95 12 10,000 - 7 - 93 18 10,000 11 89 24 10,000 - 15 - 85 30 10,000 19 81 36 10,000 - 22 - 78 42 10,000 24 76 48 10,000 - 27 - 73 54 10,000 29 71 60 10,000 - 31 - 69 66 10,000 32 68 72 10,000 - 34 - 66 78 10,000 36 64 84 10,000 - 37 - 63 90 10,000 38 62 96 10,000 - 40 - 60 102 10,000 41 59 108 10,000 - 42 - 58 114 10,000 43 57 120 10,000 - 44 - 56 [SEP] Tidal Currents at Tottenville, Arthur Kill River, ARTHUR KILL Station No. 3976 Meter Depth: 15 feet Latitude: 40?? 30.80' N Longitude: 74?? 15.30' W Maximum Flood Direction: 23?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 211?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood -01:04 Flood -01:26 Minimum Before Ebb -00:41 Ebb -01:30 Flood Speed Ratio: 0.70 Ebb Speed Ratio: 0.60 Based on THE NARROWS (calculated from constituent data) From Thu Mar 24, 2005 to Mon Mar 28, 2005 (5 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 03/24/2005 02:05 +0.0 Min Before Flood Thu 04:32 +1.1 Max Flood 08:16 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 10:45 -1.1 Max Ebb 14:28 +0.0 Min Before Flood 16:52 +1.1 Max Flood 20:34 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 23:00 -1.2 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/25/2005 02:38 +0.0 Min Before Flood Fri 04:57 +1.1 Max Flood 08:47 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 11:13 -1.2 Max Ebb 14:54 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:14 +1.2 Max Flood 21:06 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 23:31 -1.2 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/26/2005 03:11 +0.0 Min Before Flood Sat 05:29 +1.2 Max Flood 09:19 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 11:43 -1.2 Max Ebb 15:22 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:46 +1.3 Max Flood 21:40 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/27/2005 00:05 -1.2 Max Ebb Sun 03:47 +0.0 Min Before Flood 06:06 +1.2 Max Flood 09:53 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 12:16 -1.2 Max Ebb 15:53 +0.0 Min Before Flood 18:23 +1.3 Max Flood 22:17 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/28/2005 00:40 -1.2 Max Ebb Mon 04:27 +0.0 Min Before Flood 06:48 +1.1 Max Flood 10:32 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 12:51 -1.2 Max Ebb 16:29 +0.0 Min Before Flood 19:05 +1.3 Max Flood 22:59 +0.0 Min Before Ebb [SEP] At approximately 8 pm (local) on March 24, 2005, the 236-foot tank barge Coldspring Harbor struck a piling while departing the Motiva facility, in Sewaren, New Jersey, puncturing one of the tank compartments. The Motiva facility is near the southern end of the Arthur Kill, a navigation channel between New Jersey and Staten Island. The barge was loaded with 966,000 gallons of #2 fuel and the damaged tank held approximately 99,000 gallons. After the crew from the tug Delta Tide realized they had hit something, they quickly returned to the Motiva facility where the vessel was boomed and the remaining fuel from the damaged tank was offloaded. The Coast Guard reports that the discharge from the barge has been stopped and the majority of the spilled fuel is held within an oil containment boom. The spill size is currently estimated at 13,000 gallons, but tank gauging is incomplete and the exact size of the spill is unknown. Pollution response contractors are on scene recovering the fuel and deploying boom to environmentally sensitive areas in the Arthur Kill Waterway and Raritan Bay, including Woodbridge, Smith, and Mill Creeks. [SEP] A hotline has been opened for the Cold Springs Harbor Barge oil spill in the Arthur Kill in New York/ New Jersey [SEP] WEATHER for Arthur Kill, NJ 2330 EST, Thursday March 24, 2005 Sunrise(3/25): 05:51 EST Sunset (3/25): 18:13 EST Observations from Bergen Pt, NY 2000 EST: Calm 2100 EST: Calm 2200 EST: Calm 2300 EST: 3-4 knots WSW 24 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight: Winds from SW at 5 - 10 knots Friday morning: Winds from W at 10 knots Friday afternoon: Winds from NW at 10 knots Friday night: Winds from NW at 5 - 10 knots Friday after midnight: Winds from NE at 5 - 10 knots Waves: In Arthur Kill seas will be 0 - 1 foot tonight and tomorrow In Raritan Bay seas are predicted to be 1 - 2 feet tonight and tomorrow Precipitation: None for tonight A chance of sprinkles on Friday afternoon Ceiling/Visibility: Unlimited visibility tonight and Friday Extended Forecast: Winds are expected to become more easterly Saturday 10 - 15 knots. [SEP] Date: March 25, 2005 Time: 0015 EST To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: #2 Fuel Oil release in Arthur Kill FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ These notes are based on the following information: At about 1955 EST the barge Cold Spring Harbor was holed and released approximately 40,000 gallons of #2 fuel oil. It is reported that a significant amount of the oil has been boomed. The accident location is at 40?? 32.45' N by 74?? 15.28' W. This is at Motiva C1 dock in New Jersey. The location is in the southern section of Arthur Kill about 2.5 miles from Raritan Bay. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Calm winds from 2000(accident time) to about midnight. Midnight to morning: Winds from the SW at 5 - 10 knots. Friday morning: Winds from W at 10 knots 2) TRAJECTORY The oil is expected to move south with the ebb tide between 20:35 EST and 03:00 tomorrow morning. The leading edge should exit Arthur Kill and enter The eastern section of Raritan Bay. With the winds expected to be from the SW and W, beach impacts should be expected on the southern section of Staten Island starting from directly
At approximately 8PM Monday, March 21st, an estimated 2000 gallons of #2 fuel oil was lost at Elizabethport Reach in Arthur Kill. [SEP] To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine From: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Date: 22 March, 2005 SUBJECT: RTC Barge 380 #2 Fuel oil spill: Arthur Kill, New Jersey FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Trajectory implications of diesel lost from the RTC Barge 380. These notes are based on the following information: At approximately 8PM Monday, March 21st, an estimated 2000 gallons of #2 fuel oil was lost at Elizabethport Reach in Arthur Kill. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WINDS: 2000 3/21 - 0000 3/22 : 15 - 20 knots from WNW (observations) 0000 3/22 - 1300 3/22 : 5 - 10 knots from WNW (observations/forecast) 1300 3/22 - 0000 3/23 : 5 - 10 knots from SW (forecast)  2) TRAJECTORY We would expect the winds to have beached the oil on Staten Island within 1 - 2 hrs after the spill. The spill occurred at minimum before ebb so we expect the oil to have moved south with the ebb along with moving to the east from the winds. The most likely area of impact would be on the northwest side of Staten Island from due east of Elizabethport Reach to about Gulfport. If any oil refloated on the flood tide, beach impacts and sheens could extend for about a mile from Elizabethport Reach to the northeast along the NW shore of Staten I. We do not expect any oil to persist long enough to make any noticeable impacts to Pralls I or Shooters I. 3) OIL FATE Oil Name = DIESEL/HEATING OIL NO.2, CHEVRON API = 33.5 Pour Point = 5 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 mph Wave Height = 1 meters Total Amount of Oil Released = 2,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 2,000 - 1 - 5 - 93 2 2,000 4 19 77 3 2,000 - 7 - 37 - 56 4 2,000 9 53 38 5 2,000 - 11 - 64 - 25 6 2,000 12 71 17 7 2,000 - 12 - 76 - 12 8 2,000 13 79 8 4) TIDES Tidal Currents at Elizabethport, ARTHUR KILL Station No. 3991 Latitude: 40?? 38.80' N Longitude: 74?? 10.90' W Maximum Flood Direction: 90?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 262?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood +00:15 Flood -00:10 Minimum Before Ebb +00:24 Ebb -00:03 Flood Speed Ratio: 0.90 Ebb Speed Ratio: 0.60 Based on THE NARROWS (calculated from constituent data) From Mon Mar 21, 2005 to Tue Mar 22, 2005 (2 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 03/21/2005 01:27 +0.0 Min Before Flood Mon 04:24 +1.1 Max Flood 07:39 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 10:45 -1.1 Max Ebb 14:21 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:01 +1.2 Max Flood 20:05 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 22:48 -1.0 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 03/22/2005 02:11 +0.0 Min Before Flood Tue 05:02 +1.2 Max Flood 08:17 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 11:16 -1.1 Max Ebb 14:54 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:33 +1.2 Max Flood 20:39 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 23:23 -1.0 Max Ebb [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information related to the RTC Barge 380, Elizabeth Port, NJ Incident.
At approximately 2330 March 20, 2005 a spill of 6000 to 7000 BBL (250,000-300,000 gallons) of #6 fuel oil was lost from a ruptured pipeline at the Commonwealth Oil Refining Company, Guayanilla Bay, PR. (NRC report 753234). The oil spill occured during a transfer operation when the pipeline supplying fuel to a vessel apparently ruptured due to corrosion. The rupture occured 5000 yards inland. An estimated 50 gallons of oil entered the waterway. The remainder of the release (7000 Bbls or 294,000 gallons) was mostly contained on land in a containment area of pipes and an adjacent ditch. USCG D7 requested NOAA develop weather forecast, tide and current predictions, and resources at risk information in the event of a significant release into the waterway. Recovery operations were effective, and little oil entered the waterway and the oil has remained effectively contained primarily in a land ditch. The only wildlife impacts reported were one egret oiled, but mangrove habitat along the ditch was oiled. [SEP] PIPELINE RUPTURE, GUANYANILLA BAY, PUERTO RICO 1730 AST, Monday March 21, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (03/21): 1838 Sunrise (03/22): 0630 Sunset (03/22): 1838 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 10-12 knots shifting to be from the E-NE at 10-12 knot by the late evening hours. Tuesday, E-SE winds at 11-14 knots are predicted to shift and be from the SE at 13-17 knots by the afternoon hours. Tuesday night, east winds at 11-15 knots are forecast to shift and be from the E-NE at 11-15 knots by the late evening hours. _________________________ Waves (In the Bay): Tonight, the seas are expected to be 2-3 feet. Tuesday through Tuesday night, 3 foot seas are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight, dry weather is expected. Tuesday, possible isolated showers are predicted. Tuesday night, dry weather is forecast. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, mostly clear skies are expected. Tuesday, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Tuesday night, mostly clear skies are forecast. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the upper 80???€?s to lows in the 70???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 13-19 knots shifting to be from the E-NE at 10-13 knots by the evening hours. Seas 3 feet diminishing to 2-3 feet by the evening hours. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Thursday, E-SE winds at 12-17 knots are predicted to shift and be from the E-NE at 12-17 knots by the evening hours. Seas 3 feet diminishing to 2-3 feet by the evening hours. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Friday, E-SE winds at 13-17 knots are forecast. Seas 2-3 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Possible afternoon showers. [SEP] A hotline has been opened for a release at the Commonwealth Oil Refining Company (CORCO) facility, Guayanilla Bay, Puerto Rico. [SEP] Tidal Heights at Guanica, Puerto Rico, WEST INDIES Station No. 4575 Latitude: 17?? 58' N Longitude: 66?? 55' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water - 01:22 Low Water 00:18 High water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Based on Magueyes (calculated from constituent data) From Mon Mar 21, 2005 to Wed Mar 23, 2005 (3 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Wed Mar 23, 2005; 07:45 am; 1.3ft Lowest Tide - Tue Mar 22, 2005; 12:03 am; 0.0ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 03/21/2005 06:40 +0.5 High Mon 22:59 -0.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 03/22/2005 06:57 +0.5 High Tue 23:49 +0.0 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 03/23/2005 07:05 +0.5 High Wed 16:33 +0.1 Low 18:15 +0.2 High [SEP] Resources at Risk for Bah???€?a de Guayanilla, Puerto Rico. I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 17:00 EST on March 21, 2005 Information in the report is based on a release of 7,000 bbls of No. 6 fuel oil. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report is Bah???€?a de Guaynilla and the shoreline and waters east and west of the bay. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material No. 6 fuel oil is a heavy, viscous oil that may persist for a long time in the environment. There is a very low water soluble component to this oil. The majority of the impacts would be to the intertidal zone of the shoreline and animals on the water surface. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shorelines on the southern portion of Bah???€?a de Guayanilla are predominately mangroves. The shorelines on the northern portion of the bay are a mix of fine- to medium-grained sand beaches, riprap, and sheltered seawalls. The outer coast to the west of the bay is exposed rocky cliffs and wave-cut platforms, mixed sand and gravel beaches on the outer shorelines; and mangroves and fine- to medium-grained sand beaches in the bays and coves. To the east of the bay the shoreline is a mix of mangroves, sheltered seawalls, riprap, and sand beaches. Corals are scattered along the shoreline east and west of the bay. For this type of oil mangrove shorelines are the most sensitive habitat present. The oil may coat the mangroves and mangrove prop roots, interfering with the normal respiration process of the plant. This coating may cause stress and even mortality in the trees. The oil may form a band at the high tide line on the sand beaches. In areas of heavy accumulation the entire intertidal zone may be coated with oil. Penetration into the sediment may be as much as 10 to 15 cm. There is also potential for the oil to be buried by sediment on these beaches, but probably not more the 30 cm. The riprap may be coated in the intertidal zone with pooling of the oil in the interstial spaces. This pooled oil may result in chronic sheening. Oil may form a band on the seawalls at the high tide line. Under heavy accumulation this band may cover most of the intertidal zone and smother any attached biota. V. Biological Resources at Risk Fish ?? Numerous species of pelagic and reef fish are present throughout this area. Impacts are expected to be minimal to the adult fish. Larval and juvenile fish near the water surface may be impacted by this spill. Shellfish ?? Caribbean spiny lobster, queen conch, and octopus are present throughout these waters. Since these animals are benthic there would be very little impact to them. Any animals, especially queen conchs, on intertidal flats may be coated by the oil during low tides. In areas of heavy accumulation there may be some sublethal impacts to the animals in the intertidal and shallow subtidal areas. Birds ?? On an island at the mouth of Bah???€?a de Guayanilla is a nesting concentration of least terns (state threatened), roseate terns (state endangered and federally threatened) and sandwich terns. Nesting season starts in April for the least tern and May for the other two species. Also present on the island are American oystercatcher, seabirds, and shorebirds. On Cayo Mar???€?a Langa are brown pelicans (state and federally endangered). Brown pelicans, wading birds, and waterfowl are found throughout Puerto de Guayanilla. Brown pelicans are found along the coast east and west of the bay. Waterfowl and diving birds (pelicans), are usually at greatest risk during oil spills because they spend nearly all their time on the water surface. Waterfowl can also become oiled through contact with oiled vegetation. Wading birds primarily become oiled on the legs while wading for prey. They may also become oiled on the upper body and feathers by coming in contact with oiled vegetation. Shorebirds usually avoid oil, but may be impacted by loss of feeding areas or intertidal prey, particularly during migration periods. Terns may be at risk because they feed on animals in the water. This behavior may result in oiling of feathers and the ingestion of oil. Oiling of birds reduces the buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by feathers, and may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Preening of oiled feathers may also result in ingestion of oil resulting in irritation, sickness, or death. Bird oiling, particularly of waterfowl and wading birds, may continue even after the floating oil slicks have been removed, depending on the extent of oiled vegetation. Mammals ?? West Indian manatees (state and federally endangered) are present in Bah???€?a de Guayanilla. Impacts of the oil on this species are not well known. However, it is assumed that oil and/or fumes may be inhaled by the animal. This could lead to respiratory distress. Also the oil may cause irritation of the eyes, nostrils, and mouth. Other mammals present in the nearshore and offshore waters include whales and dolphins. Few impacts are expected to these animals since they are very mobile and are not likely to spend any significant amount of time in the vicinity of the oil slicks. Reptiles ?? Green, hawksbill, and leatherback sea turtles (state
Barge Millicoma aground along the Columbia River. After two days she was refloated and transported to Astoria without incident. [SEP] SEAVIEW, Wash. - Two members from Fred Devine Diving and Salvage stand in the middle of the grounded barge Millicoma as it is pounded by waves today near Ilwaco, Wash. The two men were placed on board this morning to monitor salvage equipment used to refloat the vessel. The barge was succesfully refloated this morning and will be taken to Astoria, Ore., this afternoon. Official U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Mike Zolzer. [SEP] The barge was succesfully refloated this morning w/o release and is enroute to Astoria, Ore., this afternoon. [SEP] WEATHER FOR ILWACO WA,OUTER COAST, WASH 1300 PST, SUNDAY MARCH 20, 2005 24 Hour Forecast Winds: Winds are expected to be from the SSE 15 - 20 knots for the next hour or so as a front passes through the area. Later this afternoon winds are expected to be from the SW at 15 - 20 knots. Winds tonight are predicted to be from the SW at 10 - 15 knots. Waves: Swells between 10 - 12 feet for this afternoon and tonight. [SEP] On Sunday March 20, NOAA HAZMAT was notified of the grounding of the Tank Barge Millicoma near North Head in the southwest corner of Washington State. The grounding site is a state park. The position of the barge is reported as 46 18.12N 124 04.77W. The cargo tanks on the barge are empty, but the barge has a day tank with a 5,000 gallon capacity. [SEP] Barge being re-positioned with bow seaward prior to being towed [SEP] Tidal Heights at TOKE POINT, Willapa Bay, WASHINGTON Station No. 941 Latitude: 46?? 42.50' N Longitude: 123?? 57.90' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water 00:00 Low Water 00:00 High water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.0+0.0) Based on TOKE POINT (calculated from constituent data) From Sun Mar 20, 2005 to Wed Mar 23, 2005 (4 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Wed Mar 23, 2005; 11:29 am; 8.4ft Lowest Tide - Wed Mar 23, 2005; 06:00 pm; 0.5ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 03/20/2005 03:00 +4.7 Low Sun 08:48 +7.7 High 16:03 +1.3 Low 22:47 +6.9 High ------------------------------------------------------- 03/21/2005 04:05 +4.1 Low Mon 09:52 +7.9 High 16:49 +0.9 Low 23:22 +7.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 03/22/2005 04:55 +3.4 Low Tue 10:44 +8.2 High 17:27 +0.6 Low 23:52 +7.7 High ------------------------------------------------------- 03/23/2005 05:36 +2.7 Low Wed 11:29 +8.4 High 18:00 +0.5 Low [SEP] Picture-barge underwayv [SEP] A hotline has been opened for the Tank Barge Millicoma, aground near North Head in the southwest corner of Washington State.
The 100 foot yacht TV ran aground at approximately 2200 EST on 16 March 2005at the entrance to Port Everglades on the north jetty.  The position of thegrounding is 26-05.671N; 080-06.222W as reported by USCG.  The vessel had 7000gallons of diesel oil onboard at time of grounding.  Hull damage has occurredand the engine room is flooded with free communication with the sea.  Lighteringof the fuel took place using vac trucks on the shore.Some water in the flooded engine room mixed with engine oil and lube oils.A conference call was held with the incident specific RRT to discuss decantingand discharge of the oily engine room water if necessary during a refloatoperation.  The RRT agreed to this operational tradeoff if necessary.  CoastGuard agreed that attempts to lighter all fuel and the oily seawater would beconducted prior to a refloat attempt.If decanting and discharge of the oily water becomes necessary, the dischargewould be directed into a containment boom with sorbent materials for recovery ofany oil sheens.  Pump rates would be controlled to eliminate or minimize anysheens into the water.Protection measures for sensitive areas inside the cut have been reviewed andboom and sorbents will be ready for deployment at turtle nesting sites to thenorth and to protect mangroves and Whiskey Creek to the south.The potential use of special solidifier products are being considered to removesheen from the engine room and as a filter for the oily water discharge.The M/V TV was successfully refloated at 1430 EST, March 18th.  Once refloated, the vessel did not appear completely stable, so the Coast Guard decided to direct the vessel to a nearby facility at the Dania cutoff canal rather than the planned facility further away in the New River.  The vessel made it safely to the facility without incident. No spill or even visible sheening was reported during the entire refloat and movement operation.  The vessel damage will be further assesed and repaired enough to continue to the New River facility or removed from the water by sling at the Dania location. [SEP] Tidal Heights at Port Everglades, Turning Basin, East Coast, FLORIDA Station No. 3503 Latitude: 26?? 5.50' N Longitude: 80?? 7.40' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:31 Low Water -00:13 High water height difference: (*1.12+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.21+0.0) Based on MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Fri Mar 18, 2005 to Sun Mar 20, 2005 (3 days) Local Standard Time Highest Tide - Sun Mar 20, 2005; 04:10 am; 2.0ft Lowest Tide - Sun Mar 20, 2005; 10:45 pm; 0.3ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 03/18/2005 02:02 +2.0 High Fri 08:20 +0.7 Low 14:04 +1.9 High 20:48 +0.4 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 03/19/2005 03:07 +2.0 High Sat 09:25 +0.8 Low 15:13 +1.9 High 21:50 +0.4 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 03/20/2005 04:10 +2.0 High Sun 10:24 +0.7 Low 16:18 +2.0 High 22:45 +0.3 Low [SEP] WEATHER FOR ENTRANCE TO PORT EVERGLADES, FLORIDA 1000 EDT, FRIDAY MARCH 18, 2005 24 Hour Forecast Winds: Winds are expected to be out of the NW at 10 - 15 knots with gusts up to 20 knots for all of Friday and into Friday evening. After midnight, winds are expected to be from the N at 10 knots. Waves: Between the jetties, seas are expected to be negligible. There are no ocean swells or wind waves from the E expected until later this weekend. [SEP] Yacht M/V TV Planning for Release During Refloat Operations for MV TV 1000 EST 18 March 2005 Situation: The vessel remains hard aground. Most product has been removed and lightering operations of all removable free product should conclude soon. It is anticipated that not all product can be completely removed. USCG estimates that 200 gallons of diesel and 100 gallons of engine lube oil will remain onboard at the time of refloating this afternoon as well as the oily water in the flooded engine room. Weather/Seas: NOAA Forecasters indicate that winds will remain NW all day at 10-15 knots with gusts to 20 kts. After midnight winds will become more northerly. No easterly winds are forecast until the weekend. Sea state analysis indicate no large swells or significant seas for the area. Resource Protection: Plans are in place to protect turtle nesting beaches on the inside north side of the port entrance and to pre-stage protection boom near Whiskey Creek for rapid deployment in event of a spill. Also a chase boat with boom will be standing by to contain and recover any release during the refloating ops. Salvage: The vessel will have to be partially lifted to address patching of the damage to the hull. No storage capacity is available to lighter the appx 100,000 gallons of oily water in the engine room, but this is reported to be very light sheen. At the time the vessel is lifted there is the likelyhood some sheen will enter the waterway. Tides and Currents/Trajectory Info: Max flood current is at 1103 this morning and is predicted to be 0.3 knots in the cut. If a spill occurs during this time, trajectory analyses indicate that product would move west into the port along the cut. Once the oil gets into the open area inside the jetties, wind would move oil predominately to the south and east near or into the sensitive mangoves and Whiskey Creek area. Considerations: The fuel on board is estimated to be a small amount (300 gallons total). Visible sheens are likely if a release occurs during refloating, although these sheens should not persist beyond 1.5 miles from the release point. The best option enviromentally, is to conduct the refloat at slack high tide at 1400 so that any spill would be carried out to sea vs inside the port area. If this option is considered, then beach goers near the area may need to be advised of possible light sheens along or near the jetty entrance. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the yacht TV which grounded on the North Jetty, Port Everglades, FL. [SEP] Tidal Currents at Entrance (between jetties), PORT EVERGLADES Station No. 8131 Latitude: 26?? 5.58' N Longitude: 80?? 6.32' W Maximum Flood Direction: 275?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 95?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood -00:08 Flood -00:49 Minimum Before Ebb -00:43 Ebb -00:34 Flood Speed Ratio: 0.30 Ebb Speed Ratio: 0.40 Based on MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Fri Mar 18, 2005 to Sun Mar 20, 2005 (3 days) Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 03/18/2005 02:45 +0.0 Min Before Ebb Fri 07:27 -0.4 Max Ebb 09:47 +0.0 Min Before Flood 11:03 +0.3 Max Flood 14:48 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 19:42 -0.4 Max Ebb 22:11 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 03/19/2005 01:14 +0.3 Max Flood Sat 03:47 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 08:22 -0.4 Max Ebb 10:45 +0.0 Min Before Flood 13:39 +0.3 Max Flood 15:51 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 20:37 -0.4 Max Ebb 23:11 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 03/20/2005 02:15 +0.4 Max Flood Sun 04:52 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 09:15 -0.4 Max Ebb 11:46 +0.0 Min Before Flood 14:40 +0.3 Max Flood 16:57 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 21:32 -0.5 Max Ebb
W and T Pipeline [SEP] W&T PIPELINE, MAIN PASS, BLOCK 69, LA 1630 CST, Monday March 14, 2005 NOTE: This is a site-specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (03/14): 1804 CST Sunrise (03/15): 0606 CST Sunset (03/15): 1805 CST 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Tomorrow, SE winds at 10-15 knots are predicted, becoming S at 10-15 knots by the evening. _________________________ Waves: Tonight, the seas are expected to be 2 feet. Tomorrow, 3 foot seas are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight, no precipitation is predicted. Tomorrow, widespread rain is forecast by the afternoon, with isolated thunderstorms. Tomorrow night, showers are expected. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Tomorrow, overcast skies are forecast; no morning fog is expected. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the upper 60???€?s to lows near 60. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the W at 10-15 knots, becoming N at 5-10 knots by the afternoon. The seas are predicted to be 1 foot. Cloudy skies with a chance of scattered showers. Thursday, N winds at 10-15 knots are predicted, becoming N at 15-20 knots by the afternoon. Seas at 5 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Friday, SW winds at 5-10 knots. 2 foot seas. Mostly cloudy skies, with a chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] On the morning of Monday March 14, 2005 the NOAA Gulf region SSC was notified of a pipeline leak occurring in Main Pass block 69 off the Mississippi Delta in Louisiana. A 6???€? pipeline was observed leaking and the USCG MSO New Orleans was informed of the situation at 1530 on Saturday, March 12, 2005. An overflight on Sunday revealed an estimated 20 mile sheen with 2 miles of a darker/black ribbon strip of oil coming from the source in the area 29d 16???€?26???€?N 089d 01???€?28???€?W. The estimated release amount provided by the RP was less then 10 bbls with a total max pipeline capacity of 1284 bbls of south Louisiana crude oil. The pipeline was shut in and divers were ordered on-scene. Due to rough seas (3-6???€?) on-scene recovery was limited. Much of the escaping oil was sheening and the wind and waves helped increase natural dispersion. Because of a concern with a passing weather front which would shift the winds out of the east possibly pushing the oil onshore, the NOAA Scientific Support team devised an oil spill trajectory model for what it deemed a possible worst-case scenario, a continuous leak of 10/bbl per hour from the source. This trajectory showed that by the evening of March 14th the oil would move south and be directly off Pass-A-Loutre. The evening overflight conducted at that time matched the trajectory. The sheen at the time of the overflight was roughly 4 miles long and much less oil was being emitted from the source. On Tuesday, March 15 at 0930 the leaking pipeline was successfully patched by divers in the water. The morning overflight revealed a light sheen in some areas with no visible oil on any beaches. Seas were still rough and weather conditions forecasted rain and wind. At the time there has been no more assistance requested of the NOAA Scientific Support Team by USCG MSO New Orleans. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding a pipeline spill in the vicinity of Main Pass, Block 69, LA. [SEP] Date: 1730 CST March 14, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Willie Whitmore  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: W&T Pipeline, Main Pass Block 69, LA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a pipeline spill off Main Pass in the Mississippi Delta. These notes are based on the following information: A crude oil pipeline leak in the Main Pass Block 69 of the Mississippi River delta was reported approx, 1530 hrs Saturday, March 12, 2005. The pipeline is reported to be shut in, but the leak continues. The location is 29&#730; 16???€? 26???€? N, 089&#730; 1???€? 28???€? W. The total potential spill volume is reported as 1,300 bbls. A 20 nm sheen with 2 miles of black strips of oil was reported. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Tomorrow, SE winds at 10-15 knots are predicted, becoming S at 10-15 knots by the evening. 2) TRAJECTORY Offshore winds over the past weekend would have kept the oil offshore. Beginning this evening, the winds are forecast to have an onshore component. We expect oil could begin to reach the shoreline near the entrance to Pass a Loutre this evening. The winds are forecast to continue to be onshore tomorrow. Oil could contact the shoreline between the entrance to Pass a Loutre and South Pass by late tomorrow afternoon. 3) OIL FATE Details of the oil type are unknown, so a conservative oil was selected. Oil weathering calculation indicate approx. 50% evaporation over the first week. Oil Name = LOUISIANA API = 34.5 Pour Point = -19 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 13 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 60 deg F Time of Initial Release = March 12, 1500 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 960 bbl ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill bbl percent percent percent 1 10 - 22 - 4 - 74 4 40 26 10 64 8 80 - 28 - 13 - 59 12 120 29 14 57 16 160 - 30 - 15 - 55 20 200 31 15 54 24 240 - 31 - 16 - 53 28 280 31 16 53 32 320 - 32 - 16 - 53 36 360 32 16 52 40 400 - 32 - 16 - 52 44 440 32 16 52 48 480 - 32 - 16 - 52 52 520 32 16 51 56 560 - 33 - 16 - 51 60 600 33 16 51 64 640 - 33 - 16 - 51 68 680 33 16 51 72 720 - 33 - 17 - 50 76 760 33 17 50 80 800 - 33 - 17 - 50 84 840 33 17 50 88 880 - 33 - 17 - 50 92 920 34 17 50 96 960 - 34 - 17 - 49 100 960 34 17 49 106 960 - 34 - 17 - 48 112 960 35 17 48 118 960 - 35 - 17 - 48 120 960 35 17 48
At approximately 0500 EST February 22, 2005 the vessel Great Lakes touched bottom and began leaking oil near the west side of Pralls Island, continuing to leak at an unknown rate during its transit to Carteret, New Jersey.  An estimated 2,500 gallons of diesel have been lost. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information relating to the T/V Great Lakes, Arthur Kill, NJ Incident.
A Hotline has been opened to capture information related to the Pipeline Spill, Bateman Island, LA incident. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information related to the Pipeline Spill, Bateman Island, LA incident. [SEP] On 10 Feb. the NOAA Gulf region SSC was notified by MSO Morgan City of a 100 bbl spill from a 10" pipeline near Bateman Island, LA (Lat 29d 39'N, Long 091d 15'24"W). The SSC was notified in the late afternoon and was told that an OSRO was on scene. 800 ft of boom was deployed last night. Another 200' is scheduled to be deployed today with an addition 1000' on standby. Today (Feb 11) there is a barge with skimmers on scene removing oil and oily debris. The cause is still unknown. As of now no additional help has been requested by the NOAA Scientific Support Team. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
Burn [SEP] Photo by CH [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information related to the Pipeline Spill, Delta Farms, LA incident. [SEP] Photo by CH [SEP] Photo by CH [SEP] Today members from the USCG, NOAA, LA DEQ, and representatives from the RP met to initiate an ISB on the small spill located near Bayou Perot, LA. The area to be burned was approximately 1.6 acres in size on the SE side of a 96 acre spartina marsh island. Weather conditions were as predicted. Winds were ideal at 10-15 knots from the NNE, with the flags on the cane poles blowing in the exact direction that the burn needed to move. After the USCG Gulf Strike team had placed air monitoring stations in several locations the burn was lit. In about 15 minutes the burn had covered the length of the area and arrived at the water. After a slower start, the larger pools of oily mud were burning along with the spartina marsh. Black smoke rose approximately 150???€? off the 30???€? flames and was carried to the south as it rapidly dispersed. After 45 minutes most of the area where the burn was going to cover had burned and two airboats started to extinguish the perimeter areas by blowing down the smaller sporatic flames. A second section was lit after that. This was the south east corner of the plot and some of it was missed by the first initial burn. This second burn moved quickly towards the water and then slowly to the west with the help of the NNE breeze. After roughly an hour and a half the burn was completed with success. There was no collateral damage or unplanned upwind burning. There was some residual oil left, specifically sections of emulsified oil. Recovery is expected to begin rather soon, as fresh green shoots were appearing in the marsh. Results from the USCG Strike team air monitoring stations are pending. No further assistance has been requested by the Coast Guard. [SEP] BAYOU INSITU BURN, BAYOU PEROT, LOUISIANA 1140 CST, Wednesday February 16, 2005 This is a site specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (02/16): 1751 Sunrise (02/17): 0640 Sunset (02/17): 1751 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 15 knots with higher gusts decreasing to 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Thursday night through Friday, NE winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Waves: Thursday, choppy seas are forecast to diminish to light choppy seas by the afternoon hours. Thursday night through Friday, light choppy seas are expected. Precipitation: Thursday through Thursday night, dry weather is predicted. Friday, scattered showers are forecast. Inversion Height: Thursday, an inversion height of 1,000-1,500 feet is expected to lift to 2,000-3,000 feet by the afternoon hours. Thursday night, an inversion height of 1,000 feet is predicted. Friday, an inversion height of 1,000-1,500 feet is forecast to lift to 3,500 feet by the afternoon hours. Ceiling/Visibility: Thursday, cloudy skies are expected. Thursday through Friday, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the 60's to lows in the 40's. Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the SE at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas light chop. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. Sunday, south winds at 10-15 knots are predicted to increase to 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas light chop increasing to choppy seas by the afternoon hours. Mostly cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Monday, W-SW winds at 15-20 knots are forecast. Seas choppy. Mostly cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Initial Report Delta Farm Pipeline Spill USCG MSU Houma was notified of a pipeline spill from the Delta Farm site off Bayou Perot, Louisiana on February 9, 2005. The NOAA SSC was contacted on Friday about the spill and a possible in-situ burn scenario proposed by the OSRO. NOAA SSC Charlie Henry visited the site on Saturday, Feb 12, 2004 with representatives of the USCG and RP. He reported that the spill, located at Lat 29d 38.49N and Long 090d 11.22W consisted of approximately 30-50 bbls of Louisiana crude oil over a section of marsh about 100 x 40 yards. The spill was located on the southern side of a 96 acre island. The marsh consists mostly of Spartina with some young grasses just starting to green up with most grasses between 1-2m in height. The RP submitted an in-situ burn proposal on Tuesday, Feb 15, 2004 and a conference call was held to discuss the possibility. The main issue discussed was the possibility of how much marsh could actually be burnt, the weather and burn plan, along with the environmental trade-offs of leaving the oil in a passive clean up phase versus the ISB. The landowner and RP approved of the ISB approach and agreed to claim all liability of any unplanned events. State Trustees also approved of the plan.  On Wednesday the USCG approved of the ISB plan. ASSC William Whitmore went out on scene with the Houma COTP and other USCG and RP representatives. While on-scene the ASSC coordinated a conference call with members of RRT VI for final ISB approval, which was granted. The burn is currently scheduled to take place tomorrow, Feb 17 at 0800. A downwind burn is planned. Winds are predicted to be out of the NNE at 15 knots in the morning, decreasing to 10-15 knots in the afternoon, which should push the fire thru the spill area towards the canal. The NOAA Scientific Support will be on scene for the ISB tomorrow.
At 0700(Hawaii Time) on 02 Feb, an inbound 550ft cement carrier went aground at the entrance of Barber's Point--21deg 18.6n 158deg 07.6w.  There were 550 tons (120,000 gal) of IFO on board. At high tide, the USCG and 3 tugs tried unsuccessfully to refloat her. After offloading most of the vessel's fuel and several tons of the granular concrete cargo, the vessel was successfully floated off the reef early the morning of February 15 on the high tide and towed into deep water.  No oil was released during the operations.  A joint natural resource trustee and RP dive survey of vessel damage was conducted in the afternoon to assess grounding damage of coral. [SEP] Vessel Status: M/V Cape Flattery remains hard aground with no fuel released. P&I / Coast Guard Divers reported that there is a significant scar at the point of impact although the hull does not appear to be breached. The vessel is under ballast to improve stability and 400 of her 550 feet rest upon the bottom. One tug provides strain and keeps the bow pointed into the reef and prevents broaching. Today???€?s Operations: Samples were obtained directly from the vessel (of both the diesel and the IFO 380 fuels). NOAA will use its sample to test dispersant effectiveness and for sample matching in the event of a release. Fuel lightering operations are presently underway having been delayed for most of the day. Lightering is expected to continue until 0100 04Feb when the vessel will de-ballast and another attempt will be made to wrest the vessel from the coral. Dispersant use is pre-authorized; a C-130 stands ready with and ADS pack attached. Should there be a release and should it move offshore as expected, dispersant use is possible to likely. NOAA HAZMAT: NOAA Scientific Support Team has provided guidance on dispersant use, resources at risk, and tailored weather, tides, and surf forecasts. Furthermore, NOAA has provided most likely case release scenario trajectories using real-time environmental parameters, historical and local knowledge, and the results of the NOAA HAZMAT Drift Card Study. Tomorrow???€?s Operations: Depending upon the results from tonight???€?s towing efforts, lightering will continue tomorrow. The good news is that the tide is on a rising cycle for the next several days which will increase buoyancy. The bad news is that the swell waves are expected to back to the NW and increase over the next several days which would impact the vessel motion, increase the likelihood of release, and further damage the sensitive coral heads in vicinity. There will be a NOAA SSC on scene tomorrow unless the vessel is freed without incident tonight. Media Interest: Moderate Local Wildlife Impacts: Unknown damage to sensitive coral NOAA on scene: John Naughton, NOAA Fisheries [SEP] If spilled Wednesday AM. [SEP] Takes latest winds and release at Friday's high tide [SEP] Takes latest winds and release at Friday's high tide [SEP] photos [SEP] GROUNDED VESSEL, CAPE FLATTERY - BARBERS POINT, KAPOLEI HAWAII 0900 HST, Sunday February 6, 2005 This is a site specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunday Forecast - of note the low high tide will occur at 2:05 pm for this location Winds: Northeast to east winds 5-10 knots. Waves: 1-2 foot wind waves with 1-3 foot northwest swell early gradually increasing to 3-5 foot northwest swells late day. Precipitation: Little to no chance. Ceiling: Partly cloudy. Sunday Night Forecast Winds: East to Northeast winds around 5 knots occasionally 5-10 knots. Waves: 1-2 foot wind waves with 4-6 foot northwest swells. Precipitation: None. Ceiling: Mostly clear. Monday Forecast Winds: East winds 5-10 knots increasing to 10 knots. Waves: 1-2 foot wind waves with 1-2 foot swells. Precipitation: Isolated showers by midday becoming Widely scattered showers late. Ceiling: Partly cloudy early becoming mostly cloudy. Monday Night Forecast Winds: East to northeast winds 10-15 knots. Waves: 2-4 foot wind waves with 4-6 foot northwest swells. Precipitation: Little to no chance. Ceiling: Partly cloudy. Extended Forecast: Tuesday through Wednesday Winds Northeast at 12-18 knots Tuesday becoming East Southeast 13-18 knots Tuesday. Wind waves 1-3 feet with a northwest swell 3-7 feet. Partly cloudy with isolated showers possible. [SEP] If spilled Wednesday AM. [SEP] photos [SEP] Takes latest winds and release at Friday's high tide [SEP] M/V CAPE FLATTERY, BARBERS POINT, OAHU, HAWAII 1030 HST, Thursday February 3, 2005 NOTE: This is a site-specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for the incident site. Sunset (2/3): 1823 Sunrise (2/4): 0707 Sunset (2/4): 1824 36-Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today through tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 15-20 knots. Tomorrow through tomorrow night, NE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. _________________________ Waves: Today through tonight, NW swell with combined seas of 8-10 feet are predicted. Tomorrow through tomorrow night, NW swell with combined seas of 5-6 feet are expected. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through tomorrow night, scattered showers are forecast. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through tomorrow night, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the upper 70???€?s to lows in the mid 60???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday: NE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Seas are predicted to be 5 feet. Scattered showers are forecast with mostly cloudy skies. Sunday: NE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Seas are predicted to be 2 feet. Isolated showers are forecast with partly skies. Monday: NE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Seas are predicted to be 6 feet. Isolated showers are forecast with partly skies. [SEP] Vessel Status: The M/V Cape Flattery remains hard aground on rocky reef off Barbers Point Harbor, with no fuel released. Today???€?s Operations: After operational difficulties in the morning, off-loading of the cement cargo resumed this afternoon. Swell conditions continue to make operations difficult. If sufficient progress is made tonight and tomorrow, salvors will attempt to pull the vessel off the reef at the higher high tide Thursday morning. NOAA Scientific Support team Activities: NOAA provided two sets of trajectories for potential release of the 10,000 gallons of fuel in ballast tank #2 during attempts to refloat the vessel at high tide (one set for February 9 and another for February 10). NOAA provided guidance on anchor placement to minimize damage to coral, dispersant use and monitoring, and risks to aquaculture. The NOAA team continued to provide weather support and overflight observations. Media Interest: Moderate local NOAA on scene:  Ruth Yender ORR Joel Cline NWS [SEP] Attached is the LSU results of dispersant testing for oils from the M/V Cape Flattery
On 1/26/05 (Wednesday), a pipeline broke and spilled an estimated 63,000 gallons of light crude oil into the Kentucky River near Carrollton, KY. NOAA SSC assistance has been requested. Feb 14 2005 the FOSC made a boat survey from the Kentucky River past Louisville and saw no evidence of oil. Feb 15 2005 he made an overflight of the same area and saw no sheen. It appears that the high water on the Ohio River has removed any sign of oil. [SEP] Thursday afternoon the SSC was contacted by the EPA FOSC about a pipeline spill near Carrollton KY. Mid-Valley Pipeline owns the pipeline. The break occurred about 15 feet from the Kentucky River and released 63,000 gallons of a light crude oil /gas condensate mixture. The break occurred on January 26 and was secured and purged Friday. A series of boom was placed on the Kentucky River about 5 miles from the confluence of the Ohio River, and has been very effective. Large amounts of oil are collecting behind this boom. The spill contractors have recovered 30,800 gallons of OIL using drum skimmers. However, some oil has been seen downstream. The Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission (ORSANCO) conducted a series of water sampling stations along the Ohio River to determine BTEX levels. On January 27th and the morning of the 28th BTEX levels of up to 8ppb were found 60 miles downstream of the spill site. By the afternoon of the 28th the levels had fallen to less than 1ppb. It appears that one ???€?slug???€? of oil escaped the Kentucky River before boom could be installed. The ORSANCO representative stated that background levels of BTEX on the Ohio River are at non-detect levels. ORSANCO plans on continuing the monitoring program at all municipal water intakes all the way to Paducah KY. The state of Kentucky has requested that the RP conduct a robust water-sampling program in the Kentucky and the Ohio Rivers, in addition to ORSANCO???€?s program. Today a mobile lab arrived on scene to process these samples. The lab is set up to test for volatiles, total TPH, semi-volatiles, and PAHs. Turn around time for the tests will be under 1 hour. The majority of the oil has been collected in three locations. The largest collection is in the downstream boom. The other two are the mouths of small tributaries that empty into the Kentucky River. The prevailing winds pushed the oil into the tributaries. Booms have been placed to keep the oil from remobilizing. SSC Activities: The original request from the FOSC was for SSC support in the SCAT process. Today a preliminary SCAT survey of the area was undertaken. Due to heavy snow cover little of the shoreline could be seen. However, important information on the area was learned. The main river and the tributaries are deeply incised. The banks are anywhere from 10-15 feet high. They are composed of a very fine, water soaked sediment with a consistency of frosting. The shoreline is to steep and soft to support shoreside cleanup activities. Also a cut was made in the bank at a heavily oil location, and no oil was detected 2 inches in. It appears that the sediment is to fine and wet to allow oil penetration. Three habitats are at risk from this spill. The steep unconsolidated banks, exposed tree root balls, and submerged trees. The only area that showed any indications of oiling was the submerged trees. Oil and floating detritus had collected in the branches and along the trunks of these trees. The SSC began developing cleanup strategies and endpoints with the RP and the EPA for these three habitats. Two of the folks from DEP were students from lat springs Fresh Water SOS class and had high praise for NOAA HAZMAT. This confidence allowed the SSC to work as a liaison between the USEPA and the State of Kentucky. [SEP] Large amounts of oil continue to collect behind boom. The spill contractors recovered around 9,000 gallons of fluid using drum skimmers. After the tanks have settled an accurate estimate of the oil recovered will be available. To date 30,800 gallons of oil have been recovered. Scattered patches of silver sheen was reported 1/4 of a mile down the Ohio River. The Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission (ORSANCO) continues to collect water samples from down stream water intakes. Evansville, IN registered a trace of BTEX today. Evansville is 250 river miles downstream of the confluence of the Kentucky River. All BTEX measurements were below drinking water standards. The pipe break has been cut and removed. A new pipe section has been placed. The final welding of the pipe should take place tonight. Following x-ray inspection the pipe will be ready for service. The state has requested that the RP ensure that all soil used to back fill the hole surrounding the pipe break be tested for oil. The spill organization should be switching from a response phase to an operational/monitoring phase by Tuesday. SSC Activities: Three miles of shoreline were SCAT surveyed. Due to the steepness of the bank and the slickness of the sediment all surveys were conducted by boat. All shorelines that were in contact with sheens on the water appeared to be oiled. Those arrears were no surface sheen was present the shorelines were clean. The oil appears not to be sticking to the sediments. The only areas that were oiled were tree roots and snags that had collected oil and detritus. Nine snags were identified and the contained around 2000 square feet of oiled material. The SSC and the RP rep. developed cleanup strategies and endpoints. All required parties accepted these ideas. The UC will formally decide on them tomorrow. Future Plans: Continue SCAT operations. Most of the cleanup will be conducted using trash pumps with fire hoses. A test will be conducted to determine the best flow rates and distances to reduce damages to the shoreline. On Scene: Richard Wingrove [SEP] There is very little oil remaining in the Kentucky River. The Paddlewheel boom site has about one barrel of oil to be recovered. This site has had numerous hits from large floating trees that disrupted operations. The operation chief reports that the boom area at the confluence has ???€?around 5 hours of oil remaining???€?. The largest volumes of oil remain in the two small tributaries. Both of these tributaries are boomed and the oil should be recovered soon. There is the possibility that this oil could be released if it is not recovered soon. The Kentucky River and the Ohio River are expected to rise by 2 feet in the next 2 days. Scattered sheen was seen 30 miles downstream from Louisville this morning. The overflight turned back at that point. It appeared that the sheens continued further downstream. The sheens extended all the way back to the Kentucky River. No black oil was seen any where on the Ohio River, except along the shorelines. Beach impacts extended another 12 miles past Milton KY. Indiana conducted SCAT surveys on their shorelines. No impacts were seen. This is consistent with the overflight results. Water Sampling: The Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission (ORSANCO) continues to collect water samples from down stream water intakes. The state of Kentucky has suspended water sampling in the Kentucky River until further notice. There have been no detectable levels of BETX since the second day of the incident. Tomorrow there will be a large water-sampling meeting with ORSANCO, Kentucky, Indiana, City of Louisville, and the USEPA. The sampling program and need will be discussed. The UC held a public meeting tonight. SSC Activities: Conducted a SCAT survey of all areas where black oil was seen on yesterday???€?s overflight. Two SCAT teams completed the 12 mile oiled section. The impacts consisted of a 1- 5 foot band of oil. The oil was on average about 1 cm thick. The water level has dropped since the oil stranded so the oil is 2 feet from the water line. Any tree or bush exposed to the oil has a 1-foot band of oil about 1 foot above the water line. Also on erosional banks the oil is being buried where the escarpment is slumping onto the oil. Future Plans: Complete Kentucky River from the lock to the Ohio River. Presently there are numerous strings of boom blocking the river. SCAT teams will be deployed on the Ohio based on the previous days sighting. With the impending rise in water level, there will be numerous changes in the present oiling pattern. It is expected that many areas may need to be surveyed a second time. On Scene: Richard Wingrove Zack Nixon RPI arrived on scene [SEP] Resources at Risk for the Kentucky and Ohio Rivers, KY and IN I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 16:00 EDT on January 28, 2005. Information in the report is based on a spill of 63,000 gallons of Gulf Coast Super Sweet crude oil from a
On Friday morning, 14 January 2005, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a Tug incident off Pelican Island in the Corpus Christi Channel. At approximately 2345 last night, while in tow with 2 empty barges, the M/V TEXIAN hit a dredge pipe breeching the bottom of the starboard fuel tank that was reported to hold 6500 gallons of diesel (a total of approximately 9000 gallons was reported on-board). The tug lost both barges in tow. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Tug Texian, Pelican Island, TX I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 11:00 am EST on January 14, 2005. Information in the report is based on a release of 6,500 gallons of diesel fuel from a tug located in Corpus Christi Bay at 27&#8734; 49???€? 46???€? N and 97&#8734; 09???€? 42???€? W. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report is Pelican Island and the surrounding waters. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material Diesel oil is relatively light and some of this product may be mixed into the water column. Benthic resources in the shallow portions of the bay may be at risk, especially in the vicinity of the vessel.. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline of Pelican Island and the neighboring islands are mostly fine-grained sand beaches. The shoreline of Redfish Bay has marshes and flats. V. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Piping plover (federal and state threatened), reddish egret (state threatened), brown pelican (federal and state endangered), peregrine falcon (federal and state endangered), and white-faced ibis (state threatened) may be on Pelican Island. Brown pelicans and piping plover are also in Redfish Bay. Other Birds Other wading and shorebirds may be present on Pelican Island at this time of year. Redfish Bay and Cove may have high concentrations of waterfowl including redhead, northern pintail, lesser scaup, and mergansers. Fish and Invertebrates There are high concentrations of fish are present throughout the Redfish Bay. Habitats There are seagrass beds on the south and northeast sides of Pelican Island and throughout Redfish Bay and Cove. VI. Human-Use Resources at Risk There are no significant human use resources in the vicinity of Pelican Island. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the Tug Texian which hit an obstruction and is leaking oil in Corpus Christi, TX. [SEP] Date: 1230 CST January 14, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded Tug M/V Texian, Corpus Christi Bay FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a potential release of Diesel Fuel from the Tug M/V Texian. These notes are based on the following information: At approximately 2345 last night, while in tow with 2 empty barges, the tug M/V Texian hit a dredge pipe breeching the bottom of the starboard fuel tank. The size of gash is unknown at this time. The tug is located just north of pelican island at 27? 49' 46?N - 97?09' 42?W. The affected tank was holding approximately 6500 gallons of diesel. The amount spilled is unknown at this time, there is no leak reported at this time, perhaps due to a water bottom. Salvage operations are scheduled for this afternoon, and this trajectory applies to any fuel that might possibly be released during operations. The tug lost both barges. They have been located on Pelican Island. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Today, winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots with seas expected to be slightly choppy. Tonight, the winds are expected to be NE at 5-10 knots with smooth to slightly choppy seas. 2)TRAJECTORY The spill location is just north of Pelican Island, near the shipping channel. The tidal currents in the area have a max velocity of 0.7 knots. Any spilled oil will move mostly downwind to the SW, primarily reaching Pelican Island. Some fuel could be carried by the tidal currents as far east as Point of Mustang and as far west as the spoil island to the west of Pelican Island. Any fuel that is moved by the wind through the channels into Corpus Christi Bay should move to the SW while evaporating and dispersing before reaching shore. If there is a large release, during the strongest tidal current, and the winds are from the N or NW, rather than the predicted NE, then there could be some small impacts to Mustang Island, between Point of Mustang and Shamrock Island. Diesel fuel is not highly persistent. Much of the oil will be lost through evaporation and natural dispersion. Any shoreline impacts should only result in a ?bathtub ring? stain to the shoreline. 3) OIL FATE Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as 'marine diesel'. These heavier products are less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. These oils do not generally present an involved cleanup problem. However they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and can persist as a biological threat problem in low energy marine environments. The following are the results from a run of ADIOS II, using the largest possible spill, and conservative values for wind and wave conditions. Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 12 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 68 deg F Time of Initial Release = January 14, 0000 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 9,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 9,000 - 4 - 0 - 95 2 9,000 9 1 90 4 9,000 - 20 - 4 - 76 6 9,000 29 9 62 8 9,000 - 34 - 14 - 52 10 9,000 37 19 44 12 9,000 - 38 - 23 - 38 14 9,000 40 27 33 16 9,000 - 41 - 30 - 29 18 9,000 42 33 25 20 9,000 - 43 - 35 - 22 22 9,000 43 37 19 24 9,000 - 44 - 39 - 17 26 9,000 44 41 15 28 9,000 - 45 - 42 - 13 30 9,000 45 43 12 32 9,000 - 45 - 44 - 10 34 9,000 45 45 9 [SEP] On Friday morning, 14 January 2004, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a Tug incident off Pelican Island in the Corpus Christi Channel. At approximately 2345 last night, while in tow with 2 empty barges, the M/V TEXIAN hit a dredge pipe breeching the bottom of the starboard fuel tank that was reported to hold 6500 gallons of diesel (a total of approximately 9000 gallons was reported on-board). The tug lost both barges in tow. They have been located on Pelican Island, and no information as to the status of the barges is known at this time. The trajectory of the barges would be the same general direction that any spilled diesel would be transported. Pelican Island is a highly sensitive area. The tug was initially reported by the USCG at 27?? 49???€? 46???€? N Lat. 097?? 09???€? 43???€? W Long. and the holed tank was reported to have a water bottom, which has stop additional diesel spillage at this time. An updated position provided by TGLO places the vessel at 27?? 49???€? 27.8???€? N Lat. 097?? 09???€? 25.7???€? W Long. This latest position places the tug on the S side of the channel just N of Pelican Island. The sea state near the vessel was reported to have subsided since last night.
On THU, 13JAN, MSO Los Angeles/Long Beach reported numerous oiled birds washing ashore in the Ventura Harbor area for the previous 2 days. By FRI afternoon, 4 wildlife recovery teams had observed 500 oiled birds and collected 200-300 oiled birds, of which 5 were dead. No oil has been observed on the beaches during early wildlife surveys, though unusually large amounts of debris have been noted. An overflight of the Ventura Harbor area observed large patches of brown, floating material heavily strewn with debris. [SEP] Photos of oil slicks on Thursday, 1/13/05 around 1630 local time, approximately 500-1000 yds offshore between Channel Islands and Port Hueneme. [SEP] No actual lat/long for these photos taken yesterday at 1630 local, but it was about 500-1000 yds offshore between Channel Islands and Port Hueneme harbors. [SEP] No actual lat/long for these photos taken yesterday at 1630 local, but it was about 500-1000 yds offshore between Channel Islands and Port Hueneme harbors. [SEP] No actual lat/long for these photos taken yesterday at 1630 local, but it was about 500-1000 yds offshore between Channel Islands and Port Hueneme harbors. [SEP] Photos of oil slicks on Thursday, 1/13/05 around 1630 local time, approximately 500-1000 yds offshore between Channel Islands and Port Hueneme. [SEP] Situation Update OSPR and OWCN had wildlife recovery crews out on beaches in Ventura and Los Angeles Counties through the weekend and today. On 15JAN, captured bird counts were 768 live oiled birds and 96 dead oiled birds - of these most were either Western or Clark's grebes and 2 were Brown Pelicans. On 16JAN, the total number of live captured oiled birds was up to 949 and a total of 155 dead oiled birds - of which 7 live oiled Brown Pelicans were captured. The numbers of birds captured on 17JAN were up to 1019 live oiled and 185 dead oiled, showing a slight decline in the daily collection. The Brown Pelicans are being held in a stabilization center in Ventura Harbor or at Point Mugu and will likely be transported to a rehabilitation facility at Sea World in San Diego sometime tomorrow. OSPR also conducted daily overflights in the area using their fixed-wing aircraft on FRI, SAT and SUN. Reports indicate that the large patch of sheen near Platform Holly was still present, but it's size appeared to be decreasing each successive day. A sheen was also observed in Santa Monica Bay, near an area known for natural seeps. Over the weekend, OSPR also sent several oil samples to their lab to be fingerprinted. Sample sources included oiled bird feathers, oil from a buoy just offshore of the Santa Clara River mouth and oil taken from the large sheen near Platform Holly on FRI. All three samples were identified as Monterey Formation Crude, however the oil from the buoy and the feathers was heavily weathered showing no light ends, unlike the fairly fresh fingerprint of the plaform oil. This would indicate that the birds whose feathers have been sampled most likely were not oiled by the sheen near Platform Holly, but rather were oiled by the same source that oiled the buoy outside Santa Clara River. One possible thought is that natural oil seeps in the upland, canyon regions of this river are impounded - either in natural low-lying areas, or in abandonned wells and pits - and during a heavy storm these impoundments were released into the river and out into the coastal region where nearshore birds became impacted. In the Wheeler Canyon region, along the Santa Clara River, there are some such abandonned wells or pits that were cemented over years ago but are currently being looked at as a potential source. The NOAA SSC had a teleconference today with the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary regarding the potential for any of the Sanctuaries resources to be impacted and whether NOAA had any potential NRDA issues. At this time there does not appear to be any damage to NOAA resources from this incident. Additionally, the NOAA SSC discussed setting up some sort of monitoring plan through the rest of the winter in anticipation of additional heavy storms and possibly more oiled bird or wildlife events. Further discussions on setting up this plan are to follow. The NOAA SSC also briefed the Chief of Port Ops in MSO LALB about this incident details. At this time, the USCG is not directly involved in the wildlife recovery efforts as the likely source of this oil appears to be natural causes, thereby not an OPA90 event. Today the Regional Response Team (RRT) Region IX had a conference call to be briefed on the incident. NOAA Hazmat helped prepare a briefing package for the RRTIX and the NOAA SSC provided briefings and answered questions. (The base map for the area will be attached in another Hotline entry). Future Plans At this time, OSPR continues its wildlife recovery and rehabilitation operations, as well as its investigation into the source. USCG remains in close contact with OSPR and will support their efforts as appropriate. [SEP] Date: 1500 PST January 14, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Heather Parker-Hall FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Oiled Birds, eastern Santa Barbara Channel FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at a potential cause of oiled birds found in coastal Ventura County. These notes are based on the following information: An oil company reported 60 bbls of oil lost during the Ventura mudslide overnight last Sunday (January 9-10). This released oil would most likely have entered the Pacific Ocean via the Ventura or Santa Clara Rivers. NOAA/HAZMAT was notified of oiled bird reports on January 13th. 90% of the oiled birds were reported as western grebes, which generally stay within 1 nm of shore. USCG has requested an opinion on the possibility that this oil is related to the oiled bird reports. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) WIND TIME HISTORY Between January 8-12th, the local wind record show winds with a westerly or southerly component for all time periods except the morning of January 12th. Winds were primarily either from SW quadrant (W, WSW, SW, S) with some SE winds. 2) TRAJECTORY During the heaviest runoff period (late January 8th through January 10th), the Ventura and Santa Clara rivers were running very high. Normal flow for the Ventura River is less than 10 cubic feet/second (cfs), while during this period flow rates were recorded over 100,000 cfs. Satellite imagery from the University of Wisconsin-Madison shows a large plume extending from the mainland shore in Ventura County to the eastern Santa Barbara Channel Islands. The area of the Ventura and Santa Barbara River mouths show dark brown runoff close to the shore. Considering the onshore winds, extensive flooding and reported oil release, the reported oil could be the source of the oil on the western grebes. The lower Ventura River is an area of active oil development, and other businesses may have had small oil releases during the flooding and landslide. The oil also could have come from another unreported area damaged by the flooding and landslide. [SEP] Initial Report On THU, 13JAN, the NOAA SSC was contacted by MSO Los Angeles/Long Beach re numerous oiled birds that had been washing ashore for the last 2 days. On an overflight in the Ventura Harbor area their team observed large patches of brown, floating material heavily strewn with debris. They sent the photos to NOAA Hazmat for examination. They also reported that 500 oiled birds had been observed by the 4 wildlife recovery teams working in the area, with about 170 Western Grebes captured as well as a few pelicans (mainly nearshore species). NOAA Hazmat examined the photos and determined, based on the amount of debris included in what looked like floating oil, that if this were oil it could have come from oil in the upland formations where the recent landslides and heavy runoff due to extensive storm activity have occured (La Conchita region). It is possible that if oil were released into the coastal region from the landslides and runoffs that this could be the source of oil that impacted the nearshore bird species seen over the last few days. On 15JAN (THU) the NOAA SSC was notified by the RRTIX DOC rep that there was an oil slick seen in the vicinity of Platform Holly, just offshore of Santa Barbara. This report came from observations from an OSPR bird survey flight done at about 1645 on THU, 13JAN. The SSC suggested the DOC rep contact the CINMS personnel, and then contacted USCG MSD Santa Barbara directly. The SSC spoke with both Channel Island Marine Sanctuary staff today (FRI) as well as USCG Marine Safety Detachment and received requests for trajectory modeling. Based on conversations with MSD SB about the frequency
On Wednesday evening, 12 January 2004, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a grounding and diesel spill off Corpus Christi, Texas. [SEP] On Wednesday evening, 12 January 2004, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a grounding and diesel spill off Corpus Christi, Texas. The Tug WALLEY BLESSEY was reported initially reported grounded near 27?? 49.2???€? N Lat. 97?? 17.7???€? W Long. The last reported position of the tug was 27?? 49.3???€? N Lat. 97?? 17.7???€? W Long. This position places the vessel some four miles S of Portland in Corpus Christi Bay (see map prepared by TGLO). The tug was carrying 9100 gallons of diesel fuel and a small quantity of lube and hydrolytic oil. At last report, the vessel was floating and leaking fuel oil. Diesel fumes could be smelled downwind on the coast. Boom has been deployed in the area of Indian Point, a highly sensitive habitat area. NOAA provided the USCG a series of products including a site-specific weather forecast, trajectory analysis, and RAR (see attached pdf files). A cold front is expected to pass through the area tonight with winds up to 20 knots. Under such conditions, much of the spilled oil will be lost to evaporation and natural dispersion. The USCG and TGLO plan to survey the area for possible oil impacts in the morning. [SEP] Update on Tug WALLY BLESSY Salvage ops for the WALLY BLESSY were temporary terminated until a crane and barge can be located on-scene. The tug is on the bottom and surrounded by boom. A second tug struck a dredge pipe near Pelican Island. Current response efforts are focused on that response. No additional information is available at present. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Attached is photograph of tug and response that shows a small diesel slick. (Photo provided by TGLO) [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the grounding and fuel oil leak from the Tug Walley Blessey in Corpus Christi Bay, TX. [SEP] TUG WALLY ELESSEY, CORPUS CHRISTI, TEXAS 2000 CST, Wed, January 12, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Jan 12, 2005 Sunrise : 06:04AM CST Sunset : 06:12PM CST Jan 13, 2005 Sunrise : 06:05AM CST Sunset : 06:12PM CST 24 Hour Forecast Winds: Winds this evening are expected to be S at about 15 knots. Tonight, from 2000 to 0300, the winds will shift to be from the NW at 15-20 knots, until tomorrow morning. Tomorrow, the winds will then die down in the afternoon to light and variable the rest of the day. Waves: Tonight and tomorrow, choppy seas are forecast in Corpus Christi Bay. Precipitation: Chance of scattered showers and possible thunderstorms from midnight tonight to about 0300. Visibility: There is a chance of sea fog reducing visibility to to 1 mile from about 2200 tonight to 0200 tomorrow morning. Temperatures: Tonight: temperatures in the upper sixties are expected, dropping to the mid fifties at about 0200 tomorrow morning. [SEP] Attached is a jpg file that shows the reported location of the tug on 12 Jan. (map provided by TGLO) [SEP] Resources at Risk for Joseph Bayou and East Bay, Mississippi Delta, Louisiana I . Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 10 January 2005. Information in this report is based on the assumption that an estimated 100 bbl of crude oil was released near Joseph Bayou and East Bay (29&#8734;05???€?18???€? N, 89&#8734;16???€?37???€? W) on 8 January. This report does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for spill location information. II. Shoreline Resources at Risk Habitats are predominantly intermediate marsh along the East Bay sides of Southwest Pass and South Pass. Joseph Bayou is a freshwater marsh. Outer shorelines along the barrier islands of Southwest Pass are fine to medium grained sand beaches. The shorelines of the small islands immediately west of South Pass in East Bay are composed of fine-medium grained sand beaches, exposed tidal flats, sheltered tidal flats, and intermediate marshes. III. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Piping plover (federally threatened) may be wintering along the barrier islands west of South Pass in East Bay in the Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area. A brown pelican (federally endangered) rookery (estimated three nesting individuals) occurs off of the southwest tip of South Pass. Nesting activities likely occur from November-July. Loggerhead (state endangered, federally threatened) and Kemp???€?s ridley (state and federally endangered) sea turtles may be present in Gulf waters in low concentrations. Other Birds Five colonial waterbird rookeries containing egrets, herons, and ibises occur in and west of Joseph Bayou. Two black skimmer and Forster???€?s tern colonies occurs along Southwest Pass. Nine gull, tern, and skimmer colonies occur along the barrier islands in East Bay. Nesting activities are not expected to be occurring at this time of year for any of the species in the colonies, although birds may be present and nesting begins in February for some species. Lesser scaup are wintering in flocks on open water in East Bay. Several species of waterfowl are wintering in freshwater and intermediate marshes in the area, including: American coot, American wigeon, blue-winged teal, canvasback, gadwall, green-winged teal, hooded merganser, lesser scaup, mallard, mottled duck, northern pintail, northern shoveler, and ring-necked duck. Coot, wigeon, and gadwall, in particular, may be present in high concentrations. Fish and Invertebrates Species present in East Bay in January include: Atlantic croaker (larvae and juveniles, highly abundant), black drum (larvae and juveniles, common), gulf menhaden (juveniles, highly abundant), red drum (larvae, juveniles, common), sand seatrout (juveniles, common), sheepshead (juveniles, common), silver perch (juveniles, common), southern flounder (juveniles, common), spot (juveniles, highly abundant), and spotted seatrout (juveniles, common). Largemouth bass are present in low numbers in freshwater marshes (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles). Blue crab (eggs, larvae, and juveniles, abundant), brown shrimp (larvae and juveniles, common), gulf stone crab (juveniles, common), pink shrimp (juveniles, common), and white shrimp (juveniles, common) are present in East Bay in January. Essential fish habitat (EFH) occurs in Gulf of Mexico estuaries for brown shrimp, white shrimp, red drum, Spanish mackerel, cobia, and bluefish. Other Reptiles and Aquatic/Marine Mammals Juvenile and adult alligators and several furbearer species (e.g. raccoon, mink, muskrat, otter, and nutria) are present in freshwater and intermediate marshes. Bottlenose dolphins are also present in the area. IV. Human-Use Resources Management Areas The Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area occurs along South Pass. [SEP] The Tug Wally Blessey was reported grounded and leaking in Corpus Christ Bay, TX at 1900 CST today and is reported located at 27&#730; 49.3???€?N, 097&#730; 17.7???€?W. The tug is reported to be carrying 9100 gallons of diesel and some lube and hydraulic oils. 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds this evening are expected to be S at about 15 knots. Tonight, from 2000 to 0300, the winds will shift to be from the NW at 15-20 knots, until tomorrow morning. Tomorrow, the winds will then die down in the afternoon to light and variable the rest of the day. 2) TRAJECTORY Past spills in Corpus Christi Bay under strong wind conditions have moved down wind. Current winds are from the south and are forecast to change to be from the northwest overnight. We expect oil leaked in the first few hours after 2100 CST would head toward the north side of the bay potentially contacting the shoreline between Indian Point and the exposed shoreline of the island opposite La Quinta Channel. If oil continues to leak overnight from the vessel, oil could contact the shoreline counterclockwise around the bay as far south as University Heights. Diesel fuel is not highly persistant. Under the current conditions, much of the oil will be lost through evaporation and natural dispersion. The potential for oil impacting the shoreline is strongly dependant on the release rate: diesel on the surface from a small discharge rate will likely not make shoreline, but a large discharge rate could result in some degree of shoreline impact. 3) OIL FATE Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion
Tarballs discovered on the beaches around mid day on January 11, 2005 in several locations between north Dade county (Miami) to north of Ft. Lauderdale, FL.  Oiled areas included John U. Lloyd State Park.  Sheen was also reported just offshore of the beach in some locations.  State assumed cleanup lead in coordination with Coast Guard.  Cleanup was essentially complete on 12 January. [SEP] Mystery Tarballs Ft Lauderdale Vicinity Tuesday, January 11, 2005 Situation Tarballs were reported discovered in several locations around 1130 AM between north dade county to north of Port Everglades. The positions reported were; 1) 25-51.40N; 080-07.00W, 2) 26-10.47N; 080-05.52W, 3) between the reported positions along several hundred yards of John U Lloyd State Park near the pier on the south end. 4) Also at 1437 PM an area of sheen was reported just off the beach at position 26-02.40N; 080-06.00W. The state Dept of Env Protection, Bureau of Emergency Response visited John U Lloyd and reported that the area of tarballs was concentrated in one area and should be fairly easy to clean up by tomorrow. Coast Guard visited the park and confirmed this obsaervation. They were not able to find additional oil to the north. The state has assumed the lead for the response, hired a contractor and is proceding with cleanup. No oil concentrations were confirmed other than at John U Lloyd Park as of 1700 PM. It appears that this oil may have been released close to shore and possibly in small separate staggered releases. Further assessment and investigation may be conducted tomorrow if additional reports are confirmed. NOAA SSC: Brad Benggio [SEP] Mystery Tarballs Ft Lauderdale, FL Vicinity Wednesday, 12 January 2005 Final Report Situation The State of Florida is overseeing the cleanup of oil along several locations in Dade and Broward counties. The contractor SWS was hired to clean oil on John U Lloyd State Park. County Environmental personnel are cleaning other small areas in Dade and Broward County. FL Dept of Env Protection estimates that all cleanup will be completed today and no additional oiling has been reported. SSC: Brad Benggio\ [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the mystery tarballs reported along the shore in the vicinity of Ft. Lauderdale, FL.
Approximately 100 bbls of an unspecified oil was lost due to pipeline failure in South Pass 24 near the Mississippi River. The pipeline was eventually secured by divers. [SEP] According to MSO New Orleans, approximately 1.5 miles of marsh in Joseph's Bayou was affected by the spill. Little oil was observed and passive clean up continues. The pipeline, which has an open fracture, remains secured. Divers are expected to secure a clamp onto the pipeline, though as of 1200 today there was no word yet if they were successful. Delays were occuring due to strong currents in the area. No further assistance by the SSC has been requested. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the pipeline leak in South Pass Block 24, Mississippi Delta, LA. [SEP] On Saturday evening, 8 January 2004, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of a pipeline failure in South Pass 24. The initial report was that an estimated 100 bbls of oil was lost. The capacity of the line between shut in points was reported as 5875 bbls. The pipeline was shut in to reduce risk of additional spillage. The reported location of the pipeline failure was 29?? 03.25???€? N Lat. 89?? 18.10???€? W Long. This position places the spill source very near the Mississippi River at Southwest Pass. Heavy fog prevented any overflights or response actions on Sunday. On Monday, a break in the fog allowed an initial survey. It was reported that small patches of oil were observed and that a cleanup response would be initiated. The SSC will head to MSO New Orleans for an update in the morning. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Joseph Bayou and East Bay, Mississippi Delta, Louisiana (Provided by RPI) I . Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 10 January 2005. Information in this report is based on the assumption that an estimated 100 bbl of crude oil was released near Joseph Bayou and East Bay (29&#8734;05???€?18???€? N, 89&#8734;16???€?37???€? W) on 8 January. This report does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for spill location information. II. Shoreline Resources at Risk Habitats are predominantly intermediate marsh along the East Bay sides of Southwest Pass and South Pass. Joseph Bayou is a freshwater marsh. Outer shorelines along the barrier islands of Southwest Pass are fine to medium grained sand beaches. The shorelines of the small islands immediately west of South Pass in East Bay are composed of fine-medium grained sand beaches, exposed tidal flats, sheltered tidal flats, and intermediate marshes. III. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Piping plover (federally threatened) may be wintering along the barrier islands west of South Pass in East Bay in the Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area. A brown pelican (federally endangered) rookery (estimated three nesting individuals) occurs off of the southwest tip of South Pass. Nesting activities likely occur from November-July. Loggerhead (state endangered, federally threatened) and Kemp???€?s ridley (state and federally endangered) sea turtles may be present in Gulf waters in low concentrations. Other Birds Five colonial waterbird rookeries containing egrets, herons, and ibises occur in and west of Joseph Bayou. Two black skimmer and Forster???€?s tern colonies occurs along Southwest Pass. Nine gull, tern, and skimmer colonies occur along the barrier islands in East Bay. Nesting activities are not expected to be occurring at this time of year for any of the species in the colonies, although birds may be present and nesting begins in February for some species. Lesser scaup are wintering in flocks on open water in East Bay. Several species of waterfowl are wintering in freshwater and intermediate marshes in the area, including: American coot, American wigeon, blue-winged teal, canvasback, gadwall, green-winged teal, hooded merganser, lesser scaup, mallard, mottled duck, northern pintail, northern shoveler, and ring-necked duck. Coot, wigeon, and gadwall, in particular, may be present in high concentrations. Fish and Invertebrates Species present in East Bay in January include: Atlantic croaker (larvae and juveniles, highly abundant), black drum (larvae and juveniles, common), gulf menhaden (juveniles, highly abundant), red drum (larvae, juveniles, common), sand seatrout (juveniles, common), sheepshead (juveniles, common), silver perch (juveniles, common), southern flounder (juveniles, common), spot (juveniles, highly abundant), and spotted seatrout (juveniles, common). Largemouth bass are present in low numbers in freshwater marshes (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles). Blue crab (eggs, larvae, and juveniles, abundant), brown shrimp (larvae and juveniles, common), gulf stone crab (juveniles, common), pink shrimp (juveniles, common), and white shrimp (juveniles, common) are present in East Bay in January. Essential fish habitat (EFH) occurs in Gulf of Mexico estuaries for brown shrimp, white shrimp, red drum, Spanish mackerel, cobia, and bluefish. Other Reptiles and Aquatic/Marine Mammals Juvenile and adult alligators and several furbearer species (e.g. raccoon, mink, muskrat, otter, and nutria) are present in freshwater and intermediate marshes. Bottlenose dolphins are also present in the area. IV. Human-Use Resources Management Areas The Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area occurs along South Pass.
The 528-foot freighter Global Challenger grounded the night of January 6, 2005 in the Columbia Rivernear Skamokawa, WA. The vessel was refloated the morning of January 7, 2005.  The grain vessel was heading upriver and was notcarrying any cargo, but had 258,836 gallons of heavy oil and 56,339gallons of diesel onboard. No oil was released during the grounding or refloating. [SEP] USFWS provided the following map of the grounding location [SEP] The Global Challenger was refloated at 10AM PST this morning (Friday). No oil was released during the grounding or refloating. The 528-foot freighter grounded around 10:00 p.m Thursday night in the Columbia River near Skamokawa, WA. The grain vessel was heading upriver and was not carrying any cargo, but had 258,836 gallons of heavy oil and 56,339 gallons of diesel onboard. [SEP] M/V GLOBAL CHALLENGER GROUNDING, COLUMBIA RIVER 1100 PST, Friday January 7, 2005 NOTE: This is a site-specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (1/7): 1644 Sunrise (1/8): 0750 Sunset (1/8): 1645 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5-10 mph, becoming S at 10 mph overnight. Tomorrow, S winds at 10-15 mph are forecast by the afternoon. Tomorrow night, SE winds at 10 mph are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Today, rain is forecast, becoming showers overnight. Tomorrow, showers are expected, with a chance of thunderstorms. Tomorrow night, a chance of showers is predicted. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, cloudy skies are predicted, becoming mostly cloudy overnight. Tomorrow through tomorrow night, mostly cloudy skies are forecast. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the mid 40???€?s to lows in the mid 30???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday, E winds at 10 mph are predicted to shift and be from the N at 10 mph overnight. Mostly cloudy skies. Showers likely. [SEP] A hotline has been opened for the MV Global Challenger aground in the lower Columbia River, OR,WA
A fuel-oil tanker ran aground in the East River. It was first feared that some of the 446-foot long barge's 130,000 barrels of home-heating oil on board had spilled.  But by daybreak divers determined not a drop had leaked. The barge was towed to the docks under the Whitestone Bridge, and divers were in the water just after 6:30 a.m. to look at the extent of the damage. The tugboat hauling that barge ran aground around 7:20 p.m. Thursday near the Hell's Gate Bride. A Staten Island transportation company owns the tugboat. The captain was tested for drugs and alcohol and tests came back negative. The barge is now being assessed for stability. NOAA provide trajectory and weather information. [SEP] A hotline has been opened for the grounding of the barge RTC503 in New York Harbor.
On 19 December 2004 a spill estimated at 100-150Bbls was reported near an abandoned tank battery near Galveston, TX. As the RP was unknown, the incident was federalized and sediment removal occured. In situ burning was considered for treatment. The incident was eventually transfered to the EPA. [SEP] Photograph of boardwalk installed to access the hot tub, a natural small pond in Zone B2 (photo provided by NOAA). [SEP] Source of spill is a small tank battery. The largest of the three storage tanks with a capacity estimated at 500 bbls failed. picture by CH [SEP] Status Update: On 28 December 2004, the response posture began the transition from an active oil recovery and cleanup to a passive recovery and maintenance phase. Gross oil contamination remains at the site, but active oil recovery had reached a point of diminished return. The bulk of what oil that could be effectively removed without additional environmental injury had been removed. As always, the cleanup goal is to do no more harm to the environment than the oil itself. Drum skimming and vacuum truck operations were being replaced by passive recovery using sorbent materials. Daily on-scene activities were being replaced with periodic maintenance activities. These changes represent the normal transition in a spill cleanup. Evaluations of long-term remedial activities are to be passed to the EPA for management. To that end, the USCG, TGLO, NOAA, and TPW met with an EPA OSC on Monday, 27 December, to begin the transition. The recommendation of the SSC was that the adjacent marsh area be left for natural recovery or consideration of some form of bioremediation of marsh habitat. Through the transition, NOAA requested to remain as a consultant on all activities affecting the marsh habitat. Formal transition to an EPA lead response was planned for 3 January. The NOAA SSC returned home on 28 December, but will remain in communication with both the USCG and the EPA. Background: On Saturday, 18 December 2004, oil was observed in Highland Bayou near Bayou Vista, Texas (a small community NW of Galveston). The source of the spill was determined to be an abandoned tank battery located at 29?? 20.141???€? N Lat. 094?? 57.408???€? W Long. Initial reports suggested that the spill volume may have been 50 bbl, but this value was later increased to 200 bbls. The actual cause of the leak was a corrosion failure of a support arm on a 500 bbl storage tank. When the arm failed, a ???€?shotgun pipe???€? rotated to the ground releasing the oil contained in the tank. The 200 bbl estimate was derived from what appeared as the level of the tank once a man way cover was removed and the tank investigated. The true volume will never be known since the original volume of oil in the tank was only an estimate. Since there was no active RP, the incident was federalized, and the SSC was requested on-scene as part of the Federal-State (USCG-TGLO) spill management team. Oil released escaped the poorly maintained containment berm and entered an adjacent marsh. Some oil eventually enter Highland Bayou and contaminated the adjacent shoreline bracketed by Interstate 45, Highway 6, and the community of Bayou Vista. The linear amount of shoreline impact was crudely estimated at 5 miles, but most of that impact was from sheens. Stranded oil was observed in natural collection points and as stranded oil on tidal flats. Total shoreline habitat where visible oil was observed was less than the 5 mile estimate, and was estimated at between 1 to 2 liner miles. TGLO, working with NOAA, will prepare a final shoreline oiling map (due to holiday travel, several key observers during the initial response phase had left the site for vacation before a final map could be prepared). The bulk of the released oil appeared to have been contained in the marsh immediately adjacent to the tank battery. The area of heavy marsh impact was estimated at 1 acre. The marsh adjacent to the tank battery was of the ???€?high marsh???€? variety. The characterization of high marsh reflects that most of the marsh was infrequently flooded by tides. The habitat had been significantly altered by anthropogenic activities prior to the spill event. The tank battery and an active wellhead were obvious as was a large water impoundment in the center of the marsh site. Less obvious were the ditches cut in the marsh and the multiple abandoned pipelines and associated scares that littered the entire area. The area as a whole was functioning as a marsh, but the topography and hydrology had been altered by past practices. The vegetative cover was diverse and included Distichlis spicata (saltgrass), Spartina pattens (wire grass), Juncus roemerianus (black needle rush), Scirpus sp. (leafy three-square and three corner grass), Spartina alternaflora (smooth cord grass), Borrichia frutescens (sea oxeye daisy), and Iva frutescens (marsh-elder). Given the extent of past activities at the site and that the foundation of the marsh substrate was highly compacted allowing foot traffic without sinking deep into sediments, a more aggressive (more aggressive than normal) active spill response was allowed to remove gross oil contamination. At the peak of the response, a small army of cleanup workers, vacuum trucks, skimmers, pumps, and flushing equipment was deployed. The spill zone was divided into three major divisions: Divisions A and C were outside the marsh and Division B represented the tank battery and marsh (see photomap). Activities in Division B were further divided into Zones B1, B2, and B3. Some locations within Division B developed unique nicknames such as the Ditch, the Hot Tub, and the Duck Pond. The primary cleanup strategy was to contain the bulk oil as close to the source as possible and access natural collection points for bulk oil recovery using vacuum and skimming techniques. Board walkways were constructed using plywood to reduce trampling. A limited amount of trenching and digging of sumps was allowed to enhance oil recovery. A solidifier agent was evaluated as a possible replacement for sorbent pads during the cleanup. In general, the solidifier worked well, but the use of solidifiers never progressed passed the evaluation phase. Additional technique development might be required to enhance the use of solidifiers during response. At the end of the active response, more than 270 bbls of emulsified oil was removed from the marsh by mechanical recovery and an unknown quantity of oil by sorbents. Of the 270 bbls of emulsified oil, the true oil volume might have been only 20% to 25%, or 50 to 60 bbls (a guess only). Such light oils generally lose 30 to 50% by simple evaporation. If we assume that an additional 10 bbls were recovered by sorbents (only a guess), the total oil recovery might have been as high as 70bbl. Discounting evaporative loss of approximately 80 bbls, only 50 bbls would remain unaccounted for at the end of active cleanup. Of the 50 bbls unaccounted, maybe 25 bbls were lost to Highland Bayou. The remaining 25 bbls would represent the residual oil contamination left in the marsh. Such a mass balance given the uncertainty in available information should be considered only a best guess. For prospective only, approximately 60% of the spilled oil was recovered. For a marsh spill, this would be considered a very good recovery rate. The fate of the remaining oil will largely be left to natural recovery (natural biodegradation). Given the porosity of the marsh sediment, residual subsurface contamination exists. There has been some discussion of collecting marsh cores to evaluate the depth and degree of subsurface contamination, but any such follow up must be coordinated with the EPA. The NOAA SSC departed the scene on 28 December 2004. Unless additional response issues are identified, this entry will represent a final response update. [SEP] Photograph of the Duck Pond area. So called because of a duck blind build behind this and a second small pond. Photo provided by TGLO. [SEP] Photograph of drum skimmer working the hot tub (photograph provided by TGLO). [SEP] Spill operations halted for Christmas, and it was a white Christmas in Galveston with more than 4 inches of snow. On Monday, the Fed/State spill response team met with the EPA to consider transfering the Federal lead from USCG to EPA. Plans for transfer haven't been completed. On-site, the recovery of gross oil is close to reaching diminished returns and the plan is to move into a passive containment and collection mode of operations. The NOAA SSC plans to leave the site Today and return home. As follow-up, NOAA is working with TGLO to complete a final oiling map of the site and areas within Highland Bayou where oil was observed during the response. A detailed summary report will be added to ResponseLink with additional photographs when time allows. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened for the Bayou Vista, Near Galveston, TX incident. [SEP] BAYOU VISTA SPILL, NEAR GALVESTON, TEXAS 1800 CST, Tuesday December 21, 2004 NOTE: This is a site-specific forecast from the National
During the night of 15 December 2004, the chemical tanker IEVOLI SPLENDORcollided with a barge resulting in damage to a tank and spilled some 20 to 40bbls of heavy fuel oil (IFO-180) in the Houston Shipping Channel, closing the channel. The Responsible Party's spill management team proposed that PES-51 spray and wipe technique be applied (chemical cleaning agent). [SEP] Photograph provided by USCG. [SEP] Photograph provided by USCG. [SEP] Evening Report At approximately 2130 hrs (local time) on 15 December 2004, the 544 foot chemical tanker M/V IEVOLI SPLENDOR struck an empty barge while attempting to dock. The allision resulted in a 10 inch by 2 inch gash on the aft port side of the vessel and the release of 23 bbls of heavy fuel oil (IFO-180) into the Houston Ship Channel. The oil was reported contained in the industrial portion of the upper ship channel. An early report estimated that at least 5 miles of the river had been oiled to some degree. The VOPAK and CARE dock area, several tugs, barges, and at least one deep draft vessel have been reported oiled. Initially, the Houston ship channel was closed, but was reopened by midday on 16 December. In anticipation of a request to use PES-51 by the cleanup contractors to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of demobilizing the oiled vessels, MSO Houston contacted the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator to assist in evaluating and requesting Regional Response Team VI (RRT6) approval. As part of the process, NOAA consulted with both the state and local NOAA habitat managers related to the potential use of surface washing agents. On 16 December, RRT6 meet by conference and approved the use of surface washing agents on vessels if convention flushing was shown to be ineffective. At approximately 2300 hrs, the USCG contacted the NOAA SSC to jointly review a plan to use PES-51 and to review the conditions for use approved by RRT6. The argument from the cleanup contractors to use the chemical cleaner was in part due the cold temperature conditions that made conventional flushing ineffective (the predicted low was 38?? and the high temperature for next day was forecasted as 58??). As part of the review, the need to justify use due to the inefficiencies of conventional methodologies was emphasized as a requirement. The Responsible Party???€?s (RP???€?s) spill management team proposed that PES-51 using the ???€?spray and wipe???€? technique be used on several vessels in the VOPAK and CARE port area. During the review of the plan, the need for proper worker safety and personnel protection was emphasized as well proper containment and recovery of any oil run-off from the vessels. NOAA has not respond on-scene, but continues to provide the USCG verbal support and will continue to monitor the situation. On-scene plans reported to the SSC include continued vessel cleaning and shoreline assessment to identify a strategy for environmental cleanup. [SEP] Initial Report During the night of 15 December 2004, the chemical tanker IEVOLI SPLENDOR collided with a barge resulting in damage to a tank and spilled some 20 to 40 bbls of heavy fuel oil (IFO-180). The oil is primarily contained in the industrial portion of the upper ship channel between MM133 to near the Battleship Texas near the San Jacinto Monument. The dock area, several tugs, barges, and at least one deep draft vessel have been oiled and sheens have been observed as far east as the Battleship Texas. At present, the ship channel is closed. In anticipation of a request to use PES-51 by the cleanup contractors to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of demobilizing the oiled vessels, MSO Houston contacted the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator to put forward this request for the FOSC. In addition, NOAA has consulted with both the state and local NOAA habitat managers related to several sensitive restoration sites in the area. Additional information will be provided as available. [SEP] ESI Map with allision site (A) and current location of vessel identified (B). [SEP] Photograph provided by USCG. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened for the Ievoli Splendor, Houston Ship Channel incident. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Chemical Tanker Ievoli Splendor and Barge Collision, MM133, Houston Ship Channel I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 16 December 2004. The information included is based on the report of a release of 20-40 bbls of heavy fuel oil from a tanker and barge collision located between MM133 and the Battleship Texas at the San Jacinto Monument (approximately MM129) in the Houston Ship Channel. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. II. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shorelines are predominantly exposed riprap and solid, sheltered manmade structures. There are some fine-grained sand beaches, exposed solid manmade structures, scarps and steep slopes in clay, and sheltered scarps. Several restoration projects have been identified in the area that might require additional protection or evaluation during cleanup. III. Biological Resources at Risk Birds Wading birds may be present in Santa Anna Bayou within San Jacinto State Park. Fish and Invertebrates Spotted seatrout (spawning adults and larvae), blue crab, and grass shrimp may be present in Santa Anna Bayou. IV. Human-Use Resources This is an industrial shipping channel and port area. The Paktank Corporation-Deer Park water intake is located near MM131. The San Jacinto Battleground State Historical Park occurs in the area.
Alkylate Barge MMI605 collided in the Houston Shipping Channel releasing at least 1000 BBls of product. This incident had human health and safety concerns as well as wildlife impacts. [SEP] Tide height and currents for event. PORTS stations indicate that predicted tides are what's happening. [SEP] A Hotline has been open for the Gas Barge Collision, Galveston Bay, TX incident. [SEP] Trajectory [SEP] Trajectory [SEP] Tide height and currents for event. PORTS stations indicate that predicted tides are what's happening. [SEP] Initial Report At 0415 hrs this AM, the Barge MMI605 was involved in a collision in the Houston Ship Channel near MM 28. The vessel was holed and at least 1000 bbls of Alkylate was released. Alkylate is a petroleum product much like Naphtha and is highly flammable. The barge was carrying between 20 and 25 thousand bbls of Alkylate. NOAA has been notified and the SSC is providing support to USCG MSU Galveston. First cut estimate of persistence based on ADIOS Model: As a starting point, I used a 250 bbl/hour release rate for 4 hours with 10 mph winds. In short, the model predicts that approximately 20% may persist for at least 24 hours (long enough to make landfall). At present, the currents are outbound through at least noon and the winds have a strong north component, which will also move the spilled product south. We???€?re still tuning the trajectory to the most likely impact areas. Also, the winds are expected to increase which will enhance natural dispersion and help dissipate the surface slick (if the winds are strong enough, shoreline impacts will be marginal if at all). The product is highly flammable. There is also an inhalation human health concern to both responders and the public near the source and if the product should be pooled such as in a boom. The product is not very persistent, so exposure concerns will likely be of a short duration. Likewise, there are wildlife risks. A trajectory and natural resources at risk analysis will follow shortly. Time Total Released Evaporated Dispersed Floating hours barrels percent percent percent 0 ----- 0 ----- 0 ----- 0 ----- 100 3 750 38 0 62 6 ----- 1,000 ----- 46 ----- 1 ----- 53 9 1,000 51 4 45 12 ----- 1,000 ----- 54 ----- 6 ----- 40 15 1,000 57 10 33 18 ----- 1,000 ----- 58 ----- 13 ----- 29 21 1,000 60 17 23 24 ----- 1,000 ----- 61 ----- 20 ----- 19 27 1,000 62 24 14 30 ----- 1,000 ----- 62 ----- 26 ----- 12 33 1,000 62 28 10 Note, if the winds pick up, these percent floating will decrease and the % dispersed will increase. If the spill volume is actually larger than initially reported, the persistence will likewise increase. [SEP] ALKYLATE MMI605 BARGE SPILL, GALVESTON BAY, TEXAS 0840 CST, Friday December 10, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (12/10): 1721 Sunrise (12/11): 0704 Sunset (12/11): 1722 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 13 knots increasing to 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, north winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Saturday, north winds at 15-20 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NE at 10 knots by the afternoon hours. _________________________ Waves: Today through Saturday, the seas are expected to be 1 foot. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Saturday, no precipitation is predicted. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, clear skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to unrestricted. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are expected to range from highs in the 60???€?s to lows in the 50???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the south at 10 knots shifting to be from the SW at 10 knots by the evening hours. Seas 1-2 feet. Clear skies. Dry. Monday, NW winds at 10-12 knots are predicted to shift and be from the north at 14-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Monday night, N-NE winds at 16-17 knots are forecast. Seas 2 feet. Clear skies. Dry. Tuesday, NE winds at 15 knots are expected. Seas 2-3 feet. Clear skies. Dry. [SEP] Written Trajectory (10 Dec. 2004 AM) At 0415 CST on Friday, Dec. 9, a collision occurred on the Houston Ship Channel off Galveston. The location reported is 29?? 22.319' N by 94?? 47.213' W, but the actual collision occurred somewhere between MM26 and 28. Barge MMI605 has been holed and is leaking Alkylate (a gasoline/naphtha type product). If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WINDS: Winds are forecast to be offshore from the NW to N all day today and into tomorrow between 10 and 20 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: The spill occurred in during a strong ebb tide. Assuming that the spill occurred between 0400 and 0800 CST, most of the product will be flushed out of the Bay by the end of the ebb. With the offshore wind predicted to increase to 15 - 20 knots later today we expect very little of the alkylate to come back into the Galveston Bay on flood. The TABS buoys indicate weak downcoast flow which is consistent with the winds. We expect this condition to continue into tomorrow. As a result, the main force moving the slick will be the winds. The product should move offshore and slightly downcoast. 3) OIL FATE The persistence of the product will depend upon the exact chemical makeup. Alkylates can come in different flavors. ADIOS II oil fate model predicts that the product should persist between 6 and 24 hours depending upon the exact nature of the product. [SEP] Trajectory [SEP] Resources at Risk for MMI 605 Alkylate Barge Collision, Galveston Bay, Texas I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 10 December 2004. The information included is based on the report of a potential release of 25,000 bbls of alkylate naphtha from a barge located at MM28 in the Houston Ship Channel (29&#8734; 22.319???€?N and 94&#8734; 47.213???€? W). II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report includes the Houston Ship Channel and the west end of Bolivar Peninsula, Pelican Island, and eastern Galveston Island. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material Alkylate naphtha has low solubility, is volatile, and is extremely flammable. Exposure to skin, mucous membranes, lungs, or the gastrointestinal tract may lead to toxic effects for birds, reptiles and marine mammals. This product may be highly toxic to aquatic fish and invertebrates. Lethal effects on freshwater eels were observed in less than 9 hours at concentrations of 1000 ug/L for a similar product (http://www.epa.gov/cgi-bin/ecotox_quick_search). Spilled alkylate naphtha may penetrate substrates. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shorelines along the western tip of the Bolivar Peninsula are composed of coarse-grained sand beaches, fine-grained sand beaches, exposed man-made structures, exposed riprap, and salt and brackish marshes. Shorelines along the northern and southern shores of the Bolivar Peninsula are primarily fine-grained sand beaches with portions of salt/brackish marshes. The North and South Jetties and the Texas City Dike are composed of exposed riprap structures. Northeastern Pelican Island is composed primarily of coarse-grained sand beaches. Southeastern Pelican Island is composed of coarse-grained and fine-grained sand beaches with some exposed riprap, exposed solid structures, and sheltered, solid man-made structures. The western shoreline of Pelican Island and the small spoil/marsh island to the west is primarily salt/brackish marsh and scarps/steep slopes in clay with some fine-grained sand beach. The shoreline along Galveston Channel is primarily exposed, solid man-made structures with some exposed riprap and sheltered, solid, man-made structures. The Lagoon is a salt and brackish marsh. The shoreline adjacent to Bolivar Roads and the Gulf of Mexico on Galveston Island is primarily fine-grained sand beach. V. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened/Endangered Birds/Reptiles Common loon (state species of special concern) may be present in Galveston Bay. Reddist egret (state threatened) may be present at the western edge of Bolivar Peninsula. Piping plover (state/federally threatened) may be present in high concentrations and peregrine falcon (federally endangered) may be present in low concentrations at Bolivar Flats. Other T/E species potentially present at Bolivar Flats include: long-billed curlew (state species of special concern), reddish egret, and brown pelican (federally endangered). Brown pelican, reddish egret, and white-faced ibis (state threatened) may be present on the marsh/spoil island west of Pelican Island. Brown pelican may be present on Pelican Island and in Gulf/Bay waters. Species potentially present on eastern Galveston Island include: brown pelican, piping plover, and reddish egret. Designated Critical Habitat for wintering piping plover occurs near Big Reef (Galveston Island) and Bolivar Flats. Loggerhead (state endangered/federally threatened) and Kemp???€?s ridley (state/federally endangered) sea turtles may be present in low concentrations in Gulf waters. Other Birds Common goldeneye and lesser scaup may be present in
A Natural Gas Pipeline failed releasing gas and condensate in Galveston Bay, Texas. The Coast Guard set up an exclusion zone based upon air monitoring data. [SEP] Initial Report, 9 December 2004 PM On Thursday evening, 9 December 2004, the NOAA SSC was notified by MSO Houston of a natural gas release at a platform in Galveston Bay, Texas. The reported location is approximately 1 mile off Eagle Point at the following position 29?? 31.33???€? N Latitude, 094?? 54.14???€? W Latitude. The source of the release was reported as a ???€?silver dollar-size???€? hole in a 12???€? pipeline at the platform. The line normally operates at 5000 p.s.i., but may have been as high as 7,500 p.s.i. at the time of the failure. The material released was characterized as natural gas and water with very little condensate or light petroleum distillates. The greatest immediate threat would be an explosion due to an ignition source such as a ship or boat accidentally coming too close to the release. Natural gas is not highly toxic, but is extremely flammable. The release point is less than one mile from the Houston Ship Channel. In support of the response, NOAA provided a site-specific weather forecast to confirm the local forecast and an assessment of a possible fire/explosion safety zone. The latter is a very difficult value to estimate given the uncertainty associated with such releases. From a tactical prospective, air monitoring was being deployed to aid in delineating and establishing (or verifying the safety zone). Given the uncertainty in source strength information, field monitoring data is invaluable. A first order approximation based on the limited information available suggested that a 300 to 500 yd zone would probably be acceptable if the pressure of the line had in fact dropped and the size of the hole was no larger than estimated. To be conservative, the level of concern used in this estimate was 1/10th the LEL or 5000 ppm. If the pressure remained high and the hole was actually larger, the estimate would increase to 700 to 1000 yds. This same information was verbally passed to the USCG and is roughly consistent with the ERG guideline of 800 meters for a large release. Note, neither the model or the ERG was designed specifically for this type of release in part due to the water and condensate combined with the natural gas. That said, both the model and the ERG are generally conservative. From an environmental pollution prospective, sheens formed from released condensate were reported to be small and dissipate rapidly. A second attempt to shut in the line is planned for first light. At present, the NOAA SSC is standing by. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened for the Natural Gas Release, Eagle Point, Galveston, TX incident. [SEP] Update (10 Dec. 2004) The source of the release, a hole in a 12???€? natural gas pipeline, couldn???€?t be controlled by in-place valves (valve failure). A lift boat and repair team are expected on-scene in the morning to attempt to secure the source. On-scene monitoring continues and there has been a safety zone of 200 yds established and enforced by the USCG. The distance was decided based on actual monitoring data and an additional safety margin. No additional issues have been identified that would require NOAA support; therefore, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator is maintaining a stand-by posture on this response.
During early December of 2004, a huge storm drove the floundering M/V Selendang Ayu onto the rockly shoals on the west side of Unalaska Island, where the vessel broke in two releasing over 75%  (337,000 gallons) of its total petroleum fuel products of IFO-380 and marine diesel.   Nearly all the oil was driven onto the mostly rocky shorelines of Makushin and Skan Bays.  Within two weeks the bow section had sunk; however, the stern section remained afloat with the balance of the fuel.    From early January, 2005, until mid-February, 2006, a heavy lift helicopter was used to lighter this fuel from the stern section with over 70 round trips to Dutch Harbor, 25 miles away, and using a 2000 gallon steel sling-loaded cube.   Due to the potential for an additional release during this period, skimmers and dispersants (Corexit 9500) were maintained as standby response measures.   Reasonable weather during these operations allowed for reconnaisance SCAT evaluation and some modest manual shoreline cleanup. 2005 winter operations were halted around mid February due to deteoriating weather conditions.        In mid-April, 2005, SCAT and full shoreline cleanup teams returned to Unalaska Island and worked into October, 2005, until again winter weather shut down the operation with only a couple dozen of over one hundred shoreline segments needing further cleaning and/or inspection.   Modest SCAT personnel and shoreline cleanup folks returned in May, 2006, to complete the final shoreline cleanup and inspections.    Manual shoreline cleanup was the dominate technique utilized; however dry mechanical tilling and berm relocation were used quite successfully on the appropriate shorelines.      One of the key peripheral issues involved possible oiling of the commercial sea food harvest that is caught around and processed on Unalaska Island.  Heightened monitorning and inspections resulted in the finding of no oiled fish products.   Another issue was the oiling and tainting of traditional and subsistence food harvested by the Alaska natives who live on the island.   Task forces of federal, state,  local, and industry representatives were established to deal with these issues. [SEP] Photo of dead cow floating in surf zone off heavily over-grazed southeastern coast of Umnak Island. [SEP] Picture taken 1/7/05 [SEP] Close up of area of berm prior to relocation. [SEP] Picture taken 1/7/05 [SEP] Photo of Skan Bay segment 11 after tilling and close-up of cobble after tilling. [SEP] The sun has come out the last couple of days and some oil has begun to pool at Skan 13 and other areas. EU personnel on scene conducted a test for sheen, floatation, and mobility. The product did produce sheen, did become mobile, and did float--though appeared to be neutrally buoyant for a few moments. [SEP] Soybeans Emulsion 1 12/28/04 [SEP] M/V Selendang Ayu Cleanup Operations Complete -June 20, 2006 This week marks the completion of cleanup from the M/V Selendang Ayu oil spill near Dutch Harbor, Alaska. The M/ V Selendang Ayu ran aground and broke apart near Unalaska Island between Skan Bay and Spray Cape approximately 25 miles southwest of Dutch Harbor on December 8, 2004. An estimated 321,000 gallons of intermediate fuel oil, 14,680 gallons of marine diesel, and the vessel's load of approximately 60 thousand tons of soybeans were released and contaminated miles of nearby beaches. Cleanup activities were conducted between May and September of 2005 and resumed in May 2006 for shorelines that did not reach cleanup endpoint criteria last year. Over the past 19 months, several NOAA ORR scientists have helped conduct shoreline surveys, make cleanup recommendations, and inspect shorelines after cleanup. Assessment of damage to natural resources and restoration planning continue. All activities have been conducted in cooperation with the U.S. Coast Guard, State of Alaska, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the Alaska Department of Conservation, and the party responsible for the spill. For more information, contact John Whitney (907)271-3593 or Ruth Yender (206)526-6081 [SEP] scurvy weed.jpg = Scurvy Weed in KFP segment 1 Gary Shigenaka-041905.jpg = Gary Shigenaka in KPF Segment 1 Vessel listing-041905 = Image of Selendan Ayu in bay April 19, 2005 KFP-1, SKN15-25-scurvy weed.jpg = Scurvy Weed on boundary of Kof Point segment 1 & Skan Bay North [SEP] Typical penetration and coverage of bearm considered for relocation (aka surf wash) [SEP] Ship 1 12/25/04 [SEP] IMET in Command Post
On December 3, 2004, NOAA DAC was notified by the USFWS of a truckaccident along Route One near Woodbridge VA that resulted in a release ofpowdered lime into Powells Creek.  The truck was loaded with 27 tons of lime. The exact amount spilled into the Creek is unknown, but preliminary visualestimates suggest that up to 20 tons may have spilled into the Creek.  Powellscreek enters the Potomac River just south of Occuquan Bay, approximately 25miles downstream of Washington D.C.  The spilled lime is having a visible exothermic reaction in the creek and thewater is boiling near the release site.  In addition to the heat given off bythe reaction, there is concern regarding elevated pH.  NOAA has requestedchemistry support from LSU to evaluate the potential fates and behavior of thespilled lime.This portion of Powells Creek is tidally influenced and is an environmentallysensitive area.  NOAA resources, primarily anadromous and catadromous fishspecies, are present in this area and there are already reports of fish kills. [SEP] VA DEQ conducted a pH survey of Powell's Creek yesterday, December 7. As expected, following the rain, the pH levels have begun to decline in the creek. FWS and DEQ are in the field today to perform another pH survey. A call among the trustees is scheduled for tomorrow to discuss our findings and next steps. [SEP] Background information on Powells Creek: "An ecological study of Tidal Powells Creek and the Adjacent Potomac River, Prince William Co., Virginia [SEP] LIME SPILL, POWELL CREEK, VA 1230 EST, Friday December 03, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (12/03): 1648 Sunrise (12/04): 0711 Sunset (12/04): 1648 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This afternoon, the winds are expected to be from the W at 15-25 knot with gust to 30 knots. Friday evening, the winds are predicted to be from the W to NW at 10-15 knots becoming light and variable after midnight. Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the W to SW at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today through Saturday, no precipitation is expected. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Temperatures: Today through Saturday, the temperatures are expected to range from lows in the upper 20???€?s to highs in the low 50???€?s. Extended Outlook: Sunday, the winds are forecast to be light and variable. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of afternoon showers is expected. [SEP] At approximately 830 AM local time, NOAA was notified by the USFWS of a truck accident along Route One near Woodbridge VA that resulted in a release of powdered lime into Powells Creek. The truck was loaded with 27 tons of lime. The exact amount spilled into the Creek is unknown, but preliminary visual estimates suggest that up to 20 tons may have spilled into the Creek. Powells creek enters the Potomac River just south of Occuquan Bay, approximately 25 miles downstream of Washington D.C. The spilled lime is having a visible exothermic reaction in the creek and the water is boiling near the release site. In addition to the heat given off by the reaction, there is concern regarding elevated pH. NOAA has requested chemistry support from LSU to evaluate the potential fates and behavior of the spilled lime. This portion of Powells Creek is tidally influenced and is an environmentally sensitive area. NOAA resources, primarily anadromous and catadromous fish species, are present in this area and there are already reports of fish kills. Joe Steinbacher, NOAA ORR in Silver Spring is enroute to the spill site to collect additional information and coordinate with the State and USFWS regarding environmental impacts. The SSC has been notified but at the point ORR???€?s involvement is as a natural resource trustee. Images from the spill can be found at the WTOP radio website: http://www.wtopnews.com/?sid=350606&nid=25 [SEP] A Hotline has been opened for the Lime Spill, Powells Creek, VA incident.
The Tanker Kristen Poling grounded on a sandy bottom just outside East Rockaway Inlet, NY, carrying 18,000 bbls of number 2 Fuel. [SEP] KRISTIN POLING GROUNDING, EAST ROCKAWAY, NY 1230 EST, Friday December 03, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (12/03): 1628 Sunrise (12/04): 0703 Sunset (12/04): 1628 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This afternoon through Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the W to NW at 15-20 knot with gust to 30 knots. Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 10-15 knots shifting in the afternoon to be from the SW at 15-20 knots. Precipitation: Today through Saturday, no precipitation is expected. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Temperatures: Today through Saturday, the temperatures are expected to range from lows near 30 to highs in the low 40???€?s. Extended Outlook: Sunday, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 15-20 knots. Partly cloudy skies. No precipitation is expected. [SEP] To: NOAA SSC From: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Kristin Poling grounding spill trajectory estimate. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a large release of product from the grounded vessel Kristin Poling from Dec 3rd or 4th, 2004. These notes are based on the following information: The Tanker Kristen Poling is grounded at coordinates: 40d 35.077???€?N, 73d 45.614???€?W on a sandy bottom just outside East Rockaway Inlet, NY. It is carrying 18,000 bbls of number 2 Fuel. We have been asked for to provide and estimate for a worst case scenario release from the vessel. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect the estimated trajectory. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: This afternoon through Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the W to NW at 15-20 knot with gust to 30 knots. Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 10-15 knots shifting in the afternoon to be from the SW at 15-20 knots. 2) TIDES: Strong tidal currents are predicted in the vicinity of the vessel, with max flood of almost 2 knots into East Rockaway Inlet at about 2239EST Dec 03, and 1040EST and 2320EST On Dec 4th. Ebb tides, also of about 2 knots are predicted for 0434EST and 1700EST on Dec 4th. 3) TRAJECTORY: The Worst case would be for the product to be released near the time of one of the flood tides. In this case, the oil would be moved by the flood tides and the West winds into East Rockaway Inlet, and could make it as far as Broad Channel. From there it could spread into the surrounding Marsh. If the product were released near an ebb tide, it could move more offshore, then be pushed by the west winds past Silver point, and impact the Western end of Long Beach, in the Atlantic Beach region. 4) OIL WEATHERING: An ADIOS computer model run predicts that up to 7% of the oil could evaporate, and 85% disperse into the water column, leaving less than 10% floating after 24 hours. However, this estimate is for fully developed seas outside the inlet. Inside the inlet, the dispersion will be substantially less. In this case, there could be about 10% of the oil remaining after 36-48 hours. [SEP] Here are the tidal currents [SEP] Here are the tide heights [SEP] Tide heights and tide currents. [SEP] Tide heights and tide currents. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened for the T/V Kristin Poling, East Rockaway Inlet, NY 3Dec2004 incident.
Grounded freighter M/V Saudi Abha in Chesapeake Bay near the entrance channel to Baltimore, MD.   Vessel was refloated without release. [SEP] Tidal Current Predictions in the Vicinity of the Vessel -- Christopher Barker, Ph.D. Oceanographer  NOAA/OR&R/HAZMAT (206) 526-6959 voice 7600 Sand Point Way NE (206) 526-6329 fax Seattle, WA 98115 (206) 526-6317 main reception Chris.Barker@noaa.gov [SEP] Predicted Tidal Currents for the Vicinity of the vessel. -- Christopher Barker, Ph.D. Oceanographer  NOAA/OR&R/HAZMAT (206) 526-6959 voice 7600 Sand Point Way NE (206) 526-6329 fax Seattle, WA 98115 (206) 526-6317 main reception Chris.Barker@noaa.gov [SEP] The M/V Saudi Abha was sucessfully refloated last night with no release. [SEP] SAUDI ABHA GROUNDING, BALTIMORE, MD 1900 EST, Tuesday November 30, 2004 Sunset (11/30): 1643 Sunrise (12/01): 0706 Sunset (12/01): 1643 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the S at 15-20 knots increasing to 20-25 knots after midnight. Wednesday morning, the winds are forecast to be from the S at 20-25 knots. Mid morning through the evening, the winds are expected to be from the W at 35-40 knots. Precipitation: Tonight through Wednesday, light rain is forecast in the region. Seas: Tonight, the seas are expected to be 2-3 feet. Wednesday, the seas are forecast to be 3-4 feet. Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Wednesday, cloudy skies are predicted. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the low to mid 60's to lows in the lower 40's. Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 10-15 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Friday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 10-15 knots. Partly cloudy skies. [SEP] Tidal Predictions for region of vessel: [SEP] Vessel [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the grounded freighter M/V Saudi Abha in Chesapeake Bay near the entrance channel to Baltimore, MD. [SEP] Tidal Predictions in the Vicinity of the Vessel. -Chris
At approximately 9:30 p.m. on November 26, 2004, the M/T Athos I, a 750-foot tanker, hit one (or more) obstructions in the Delaware River near Philadelphia, PA. A 15-foot curved piece of pipe was ultimately found with the assistance of the NOAA Navigation Response Team. After further examination, the hull showed evidence that the ship may have hit more than one object. The tanker, registered in Cyprus, was carrying 325,000 barrels (13.6 million gallons) of heavy crude oil from Venezuela. The collision(s) created three holes, the largest a 6-foot by 2-foot tear in the hull that breached a center cargo tank and port side water ballast tank, releasing approximately 264,000 gallons. After the incident, a review of PORTS tide level recordings showed the collision(s) occurred at maximum spring low tide. The oil from the ruptured tank spread down river, ultimately oiling 57 miles of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware shorelines. The spill closed the Delaware River to commercial vessel traffic for over a week. Submerged oil resulted in contamination of water intakes and the closure of the Salem Nuclear Power Plant. [SEP] ???€? Cleanup operations continue with daily adjustments to manpower and tasking for current weather conditions. No boat activities were conducted today due to strong winds. Activities included marina and equipment decontamination and shoreline cleaning. Shoreline cleaning primarily consists of tar mat and tar patty removal in previously cleaned areas as they become exposed. SCAT/SIT/MAT: ???€? Items from recent Environmental Unit reports are still pending unless noted otherwise. ???€? The EU continues planning for current and future SCAT & SIT needs as part of overall long-range/ winter operations planning efforts. ???€? Four MAT teams were scheduled for today, however one team (scheduled for PA-5 & 8) was cancelled. Each of the three teams consisted of representatives from PA or NJ, EU and/or operations RP representatives, and USCG personnel. Teams assessed shoreline within segments NJ-5, PA-6 zones A & B, and NJ-3. ???€? Four MAT teams are scheduled for tomorrow. These teams will assess shoreline in segments PA-5, PA-8, NJ-4 and NJ-6. INFORMATION MANAGEMENT: ???€? The next gross decon progress update will occur as soon as possible. SUBMERGED OIL: ???€? Trends in tarballs and submerged oil occurrence continue to be monitored using a consortium of industrial intakes. This effort is scheduled to continue indefinitely. A Delaware City facility observed tarballs and sheen on their intake screens and in their effluent yesterday. Today, the facility reported a slight sheen in their intake. ???€? Monitoring of crab trap snare samplers has been suspended due to weather conditions. SCIENCE TEAM: ???€? The Science Meeting was held on 3/3/04. Minutes from this meeting are forthcoming. WILDLIFE: ???€? Wildlife recovery continues. Tri-State Bird Rescue and Research (TSBRR) is responsible for individual calls from the public, cleanup crews, etc. USDA APHIS crews remain on stand-by. ???€? On Monday (March 7, 2005) and Tuesday (March 8, 2005), nothing was collected or released. As of COB Tuesday 3/8/05, a total of 2 live birds (one domestic duck and one red-bellied gull) were still in residence at TSBRR. The total number of dead birds spill-to-date is 183. The total number of birds rehab???€?ed and released spill-to-date is 385. [SEP] Overflight map Dec 12 1200 [SEP] Overflights Dec 9 1100 and 1530 [SEP] Trajectory Update Dec 7 2004 [SEP] Trajectory Update Dec 7 2004 [SEP] Overflight Nov 29 0930 [SEP] Trajectory Update Dec 5 [SEP] SCAT Maps [SEP] Incident Events Summary: The salvage plan is being implemented and the vessel is anticipated to be moved to the pier on Saturday. NOAA Navigational Response Team arrived this evening and will deploy tomorrow. Cleanup is going fast and furious. By tomorrow there is an estimated 1,000 people to be working on the clean up. People are coming in from the Gulf to augment the local workforce. The statement concerning duck hunting was distributed through the JIC out to the public. There was a media availability in the command post where reporters were allowed to enter the command post and talk with personnel and film activities. The investigation into the cause of the release is still ongoing. SSC Activities: Coordinating the Environmental Unit, which now includes the Wildlife Recovery, SCAT, Water Quality Monitoring, and now Subsurface Oil. The NOAA personnel are functioning well in Unit. However, there is an issue with working with the contractor hired to assist. Hopefully this will be worked out tomorrow. The last two days SCAT data was tabulated and plotted onto chartlets and color copies distributed. We received information on PA state endangered species located on Little Tinicum Island that needs to be passed to cleanup crews. Spoke with the people at the Salem Nuclear Power Plant about oil transport and sent them the overflight map and trajectory reports. Participated in Unified Command briefings and had to break the news about finding submerged oil. Attended afternoon press conference and had several media interview. In addition handed out overflight maps to reporters. Held evening meeting with the Environmental Unit to bring everyone up to speed and plan for tomorrow???€?s actives. RP may be supplying additional person to help augment Environmental Unit and eventually take over lead. Media interest remains high. The OSC???€?s Deputy requested NOAA assist in obtaining RRT approval to test lift and float surface washing agents that could be used to remove sheening oil from large vessels. The SST prepared and request, developed a test process for RRT II and RRT III and discussed the details during an RRT conference call. The RRT???€?s subsequently approved this request and test process. The SST began the process of developing ???€?end points???€? for cleanup and cleanup methods. The next task is to coordinate with response stakeholders for their changes and recommendations. Water Quality/Submerged Oil Issues: Only one of the four ???€?snare water-column samplers???€? (new NOAA design) was recovered after the storm. The snare at the southern end of Tinicum Island was heavily oiled along the bottom 5 feet, the next 5 feet were clean, and the rest of the snare (35 ft) was very lightly oiled, with light oiling near surface. This information indicated the potential for significant amounts of submerged oil. Three additional ???€?snare water-column samplers???€? were deployed: 1) in the river near the mouth off Big Timber Creek; 2) near Mantua Creek; and 3) near the Logan Power Plant. The mechanisms of submergence that are being researched include: 1) some part of the oil initially sunk to the bottom at the collision site; and 2) the oil initially floated then stranded onshore, picked up sediment, then was eroded from the shoreline. A source sample is being sent for analysis of density, viscosity, distillation fractions, and density/ composition after evaporative weathering. Samples from oil from the bottom at a known submerged oil site (to be collected by divers under USCG supervision) will also be chemically analyzed to determine whether they sank initially or after stranding (e.g., show evidence of weathering dominated by evaporation or dissolution). Plans are being made to collect additional samples via grab samples, ???€?diaper drops???€? (e.g., sorbent pads on an anchor), and snare drag chains in the upper river, and more snare water column samples (particularly in the upper bay) over the next few days. SCAT Unit: Eight SCAT teams were deployed to survey by car and boat PA-1 through PA-6 and NJ-1 through NJ-5. Another team conducted a detailed helo survey from the Commodore Barry Bridge to several miles east of the Salem Nuclear Power Plant. Sheens and scattered tarballs were observed on the intertidal flats and in the adjacent water, though no oil was observed on the vegetation. Oiled debris was observed along a few miles of shoreline in Delaware, starting at the PA/DE border. Plans for Friday: Six SCAT teams will be deployed by car. Three teams will survey the shoreline from the Commodore Barry Bridge to Ft. Mott in New Jersey. Two teams will survey segments in PA that were not completed today, and one team will survey in Delaware. Overflight observations: December 2, 2004 The morning overflight reported sheens and tarballs extending from Penn Landing to Marcus Hook. A few sheens were reported off Pea Patch Island. In the afternoon, the overflight focused on the area off Philly Airport. Large concentration of tarballs was seen on the east side of Tinicum Island. Natural Resources Damage Assessment: Frank Csulak will supply a separate evening report. Genwest prepared SCAT base maps, overflight maps, and shoreline oiling maps. Wildlife Recovery Unit Daily Report 2 Dec 2004 Prepared by Group Supervisor, Clay Stern, US Fish & Wildlife Service Operations performed: Group Supervisor (USFWS) coordinated wildlife recovery efforts between command center (Holiday Inn) and triage site at the John Hienz at Tinicum National Wildlife Refuge. Wildlife recovery personnel included representatives of State natural resource agencies, USFWS, TriState Bird Rescue and Research (TSBRR) and Trade Winds, Inc. Compressed 8hr safety brief given to all new personnel engaged in the recovery effort. Wildlife recovery unit deployed 6 boats teams and 7 land team to recover oiled wildlife. Most
On November 17, 2004, the M/V Fortune Epoch detected an oil sheen in its wake after it left the Savannah River. It then anchored and notified USCG. It was later determined that the ship had run over its own anchor when it dropped it to stop after losing stearing. There was some shoreline oiling, on water skimming, and Right Whales in the Atlantic south of the Savannah R. were briefly threatened by the oil slick. The hull was patched and the vessel returned to port on Nov. 26th. [SEP] DSCO0443.jpg - Photo taken by Dr. Jacqui Michel of oiled vegetation west of Tybee Island along river. DSCN1793.jpg - Photo taken by USCG of sheen with boat wake through it observed during overflight. [SEP] Date: 1530 EST November 17, 2004 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: MV Fortune Epoch FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a leaking vessel offshore of Savannah, Georgia. These notes are based on the following information: Today, NOAA HazMat was notified at 1045 PST (1345 EST) of a leaking vessel offshore of Savannah, Georgia. The MV Fortune Epoch was reported leaking diesel from a 37,250 gallon tank approximately 4 hours earlier. Approximately 1-1.5 hours earlier an overflight reported a 6 nm sheen oriented from the vessel toward shore. The vessel is currently anchored at 31&#730; 59???€?N, 080&#730; 41???€?W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Today through tonight, the winds are expected to be from the N to NE at 10 knots. Thursday, variable winds at 5 knots are predicted. 2) TRAJECTORY For a tank leaking below the waterline, the product above waterline most likely leaked out quickly. The remaining oil below waterline would be leaking out slowly. The observed winds over the last 24 hours have been northerly at about 10 knots. With forecast light winds from the N to NE, weak currents downcoast, and rotary tides offshore, we expect a possibility of beach impacts on Little Tybee Island by tomorrow (depending on the oil type, see OIL FATE below). If the oil were to reach The Jones Island Range in the shipping channel when the tide was flooding, the oil could be brought in as far as 3 nm. 3) OIL FATE Diesel: Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils (IFO) are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. The most conservative estimate for the persistence of this oil is to use a marine diesel and IFO 180 to bracket the length of time the oil could be on the water. For a marine diesel, the fuel would evaporate significantly with 10% remaining after 20 hours. For an IFO 180, 75% of the oil would remain after 5 days. If the oil does not evaporate quickly, we should revisit the trajectory implications with the information from the next overflight. [SEP] M/V FORTUNE EPOCH SPILL, OFFSHORE SAVANNAH GEORGIA 1700 EST, Thursday November 18, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (11/18): 1721 Sunrise (11/19): 0655 Sunset (11/19): 1721 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expecting to be S-SE at 2 knots becoming variable at 3 knots or less by the late evening hours. Friday, W-NW winds at 3 knots or less are predicted to shift and be from the E-SE at 5 knots by the afternoon hours. Friday night, SE winds at 6-9 knots are forecast to shift and be from the south at 6-9 knots by the late evening hours. _________________________ Waves: Tonight, the seas are expected to be 2 feet. Friday through Friday night, 1-2 foot seas are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Friday night, no precipitation is forecast. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Friday night, mostly clear skies with some higher clouds are expected. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the mid-60's to lows in the low-60's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the S-SW at 5-10 knots becoming 10 knots or less by the afternoon hours. Seas 2 feet or less. Partly cloudy skies. Slight chance of morning drizzle. Saturday night, SW winds at 10 knots or less. Sunday, SW winds at 5 knots or less are predicted to shift and be from the S-SW at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 2-3 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Chance of showers. Monday, W-SW winds at 10 knots or less are forecast. Seas 1-2 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. [SEP] Response time analysis for potential release of 20,000 gallons. Not real spill. See part 1 and explanation on graphic [SEP] M/V FORTUNE EPOCH SPILL, OFFSHORE SAVANNAH GEORGIA 0950 EST, Thursday November 25, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (11/25): 1719 Sunrise (11/26): 0702 Sunset (11/26): 1719 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the west at 25 knots. Tonight, NW winds at 15-20 knots are predicted to shift and be from the north at 10-15 knots by the late evening hours. Friday, north winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NE at 5-10 knots by the evening hours. _________________________ Waves: Today, the seas are expected to be 4 feet diminishing to 3 feet by the afternoon hours. Tonight, 3 foot seas are predicted. Friday, 2 foot seas are forecast. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through tonight, no precipitation is expected. ________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies are expected. Tonight through Friday, mostly clear skies are predicted. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 70???€?s to lows in the 60???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be SE at 10 knots. Seas 2-3 feet. Partly cloudy skies becoming mostly cloudy by the afternoon hours. Slight chance of showers. Sunday, NW winds at 10 knots are predicted. Seas 2-3 feet. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Monday, NE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Seas 2-4 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. [SEP] Trajectory Update 11/19/04 [SEP] Trajectory Update 20 Nov [SEP] Trajectory Update 20 Nov [SEP] Trajectory Update 11/19/04 [SEP] Trajectory Update 11/19/04 [SEP] Richard Wingrove requested background information on Loon impacts from the M/V Fortune Epoch incident offshore of Savannah, GA. Gary Shigenaka prepared the following information. On January 4, 1999, the M/V Star Evviva was responsible for an incident involving substantial loon impacts off South Carolina. That incident has some similarities to the M/V Fortune Epoch. The initial release was reported as 17 gallons spilled, then <100 gals, ultimately estimated discharge of 25K gal 30 nm offshore even though almost no oil was reported on the water. CG Marine Safety Lab made positive match with the MV Star Evviva. >200 birds oiled, mostly loons, most died. Why loons? That one is fairly easy...in winter, common loons favor shallow salt-water areas close to shore. While they are solitary when feeding in winter, they also congregate in loose flocks at night. Therefore, overflights may not identify aggregations because the birds are dispersed during daylight hours. We are uncertain what accounts for the loon-only impacts...other birds don't favor the same impacted nearshore habitat? Loons are somehow more buoyant, hardier, and make it to shore more readily? Attached is information on the MS Star Evviva incident. The Damage Assessment and Restoration Plan prepared by the USFWS for the incident is available if necessary. (from Wildlife & Oil Spills, Vol. 8, No. 1) Star Evviva Spill - On January 16, oiled loons began washing ashore along the coast of North and South Carolina. The vessel Star Evviva spilled an undetermined amount of oil during a transfer operation while at sea. The oil contaminated loons that were wintering off the coast of the Carolinas. A total of 97 oiled birds were retrieved, the majority of which were loons. Because the birds were oiled off the coast and slowly drifted in to shore, they were in very poor condition when collected. Therefore, only 5 of the 97 oiled birds collected were successfully rehabilitated. "NORWEGIAN CORPORATION PLEADS GUILTY TO SPILLING OIL AT SEA Billabong II ANS, a Norwegian corporation which owns the Motor Vessel Star Evviva, pled guilty on Jan. 10. Early morning of Jan. 14, 1999, the Star Evviva experienced a malfunction in
M/V Federal Pescadores, a bulf freighter, grounded approximately 1 mile east of Ft. Lauderdale Beach. Sensitive line of limestone reefs in grounding area, with sponges, hard and soft corals. Vessel successfully refloated on 11 Novvember with no pollution released. [SEP] Enclosed is a TAP style response time analysis for a possible release from the M/V Federal Pescadores. Christopher Barker, Ph.D. Oceanographer NOAA/OR&R/HAZMAT (206) 526-6959 voice 7600 Sand Point Way NE (206) 526-6329 fax Seattle, WA 98115 (206) 526-6317 main reception Chris.Barker@noaa.gov [SEP] Tidal Currents at Entrance (between jetties), PORT EVERGLADES Station No. 8091 Latitude: 26?? 5.58' N Longitude: 80?? 6.32' W Maximum Flood Direction: 275?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 95?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood -00:08 Flood -00:49 Minimum Before Ebb -00:43 Ebb -00:34 Flood Speed Ratio: 0.30 Ebb Speed Ratio: 0.40 Based on MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Sat Oct 09, 2004 to Wed Oct 13, 2004 (5 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 10/09/2004 00:32 +0.0 Min Before Flood Sat 03:22 +0.3 Max Flood 05:46 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 10:12 -0.4 Max Ebb 12:56 +0.0 Min Before Flood 15:50 +0.4 Max Flood 18:25 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 22:44 -0.5 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 10/10/2004 01:26 +0.0 Min Before Flood Sun 04:15 +0.4 Max Flood 06:45 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 11:04 -0.5 Max Ebb 13:49 +0.0 Min Before Flood 16:39 +0.4 Max Flood 19:12 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 23:29 -0.5 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 10/11/2004 02:13 +0.0 Min Before Flood Mon 05:02 +0.5 Max Flood 07:35 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 11:51 -0.6 Max Ebb 14:37 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:20 +0.5 Max Flood 19:53 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 10/12/2004 00:04 -0.6 Max Ebb Tue 02:56 +0.0 Min Before Flood 05:38 +0.5 Max Flood 08:20 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 12:27 -0.6 Max Ebb 15:22 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:46 +0.5 Max Flood 20:33 +0.0 Min Before Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 10/13/2004 00:24 -0.7 Max Ebb Wed 03:38 +0.0 Min Before Flood 06:00 +0.6 Max Flood 09:05 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 12:52 -0.7 Max Ebb 16:05 +0.0 Min Before Flood 18:04 +0.6 Max Flood 21:13 +0.0 Min Before Ebb [SEP] Tidal Heights at Port Everglades, Turning Basin, East Coast, FLORIDA Station No. 3563 Latitude: 26?? 5.50' N Longitude: 80?? 7.40' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:08 Low Water -00:09 High water height difference: (*1.03+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.06+0.0) Based on MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Thu Oct 07, 2004 to Sat Oct 09, 2004 (3 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Highest Tide - Sat Oct 09, 2004; 05:43 pm; 3.0ft Lowest Tide - Sat Oct 09, 2004; 11:21 am; 1.0ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 10/07/2004 02:58 +2.5 High Thu 09:19 +1.1 Low 15:56 +2.8 High 22:09 +1.4 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 10/08/2004 04:07 +2.6 High Fri 10:23 +1.1 Low 16:54 +2.8 High 23:06 +1.2 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 10/09/2004 05:08 +2.7 High Sat 11:21 +1.0 Low 17:43 +3.0 High 23:53 +1.1 Low [SEP] SHIP GROUNDING, PORT EVERGLADES, FLORIDA 1130 EDT, Thursday October 7th, 2005 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (10/07): 1900 Sunrise(10/08): 0716 Sunset (10/08): 1859 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-NE at 20 knots. Tonight, E-NE winds at 20 knots are predicted to decrease to 15-20 knots by the late evening hours. Friday, E-NE winds at 15-20 knots are forecast to diminish to 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. ________________________________________________________________________ Waves: Today through tonight, the near-shore seas are expected to be 5-7 feet. Friday, 3-5 foot seas are predicted. ________________________________________________________________________ Precipitation: Today, afternoon scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected. Tonight, slight chance of evening showers are predicted. Friday, slight chance of showers are forecast. ________________________________________________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, partly cloudy skies are expected. ________________________________________________________________________ Temperatures: The temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the mid-80???€?s to lows in the low-80???€?s. ________________________________________________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday through Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the E-NE at 10-15 knots. Seas 2-4 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. Sunday, afternoon showers and thunderstorms. Monday, SE winds at 10 knots are forecast. Seas 2 feet or less. Mostly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Tidal Heights at Port Everglades, Turning Basin, East Coast, FLORIDA Station No. 3563 Latitude: 26?? 5.50' N Longitude: 80?? 7.40' W Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:08 Low Water -00:09 High water height difference: (*1.03+0.0) Low water height difference: (*1.06+0.0) Based on MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Sat Oct 09, 2004 to Wed Oct 13, 2004 (5 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Highest Tide - Wed Oct 13, 2004; 08:10 am; 3.6ft Lowest Tide - Wed Oct 13, 2004; 01:53 am; 0.4ft Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 10/09/2004 05:08 +2.7 High Sat 11:21 +1.0 Low 17:43 +3.0 High 23:53 +1.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 10/10/2004 06:00 +2.9 High Sun 12:11 +0.9 Low 18:26 +3.1 High ------------------------------------------------------- 10/11/2004 00:35 +0.8 Low Mon 06:46 +3.2 High 12:55 +0.7 Low 19:05 +3.2 High ------------------------------------------------------- 10/12/2004 01:14 +0.6 Low Tue 07:28 +3.4 High 13:37 +0.6 Low 19:43 +3.3 High ------------------------------------------------------- 10/13/2004 01:53 +0.4 Low Wed 08:10 +3.6 High 14:18 +0.5 Low 20:21 +3.4 High [SEP] SHIP GROUNDING, PORT EVERGLADES, FLORIDA 1230 EDT, Sunday October 10th, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (10/10): 1857 Sunrise (10/11): 0718 Sunset (10/11): 1856 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the east at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the E-SE at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight through Monday, SE winds at 10 knots are predicted. ________________________________________________________________________ Waves: Today, the near-shore seas are expected to be 2-4 feet. Tonight through Monday, 2-3 foot seas are predicted. ________________________________________________________________________ Precipitation: Today through tonight, isolated showers and thunderstorms are forecast. Monday, scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms are expected. ________________________________________________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through tonight, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Monday, mostly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted except during times or showers. ________________________________________________________________________ Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to be ranging from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 70???€?s. ________________________________________________________________________ Extended Forecast: Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the south at 10 knots. Seas 2 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Wednesday through Thursday, SW winds at 10 knots are predicted. Seas 2 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] SHIP GROUNDING, PORT EVERGLADES, FLORIDA 1030 EDT, Friday October 8th, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (10/08): 1859 Sunrise (10/09): 0717 Sunset (10/09): 1858 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-NE at 20 knots. Tonight, E-NE winds at 15 knots are predicted. Saturday, east winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. ________________________________________________________________________ Waves: Today, the near-shore seas are expected to be 5-7 feet. Tonight, 3-5 foot seas are predicted. Saturday, 2-4 foot seas are forecast. ________________________________________________________________________ Precipitation: Today through tonight, isolated showers are expected. Saturday, slight chance of showers are predicted. ________________________________________________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, mostly clear skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. ________________________________________________________________________ Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to be ranging from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 70???€?s. ________________________________________________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday through Monday, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 5-10 knots. Seas 2-3 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers and thunderstorms. Tuesday, SW winds at 5-10 knots are predicted. Seas 1-2 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Trajectory Analysis (Shoreline Contact) [SEP] Tidal Currents at Entrance (between jetties), PORT EVERGLADES Station No. 8091 Latitude: 26?? 5.58' N Longitude: 80?? 6.32' W Maximum Flood Direction: 275?? Maximum Ebb Direction : 95?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood -00:08 Flood -00:49 Minimum Before Ebb -00:43 Ebb -00:34 Flood Speed Ratio: 0.30 Ebb Speed Ratio: 0.40 Based on MIAMI HARBOR ENTRANCE (calculated from constituent data) From Thu Oct 07, 2004 to Sat Oct 09, 2004 (3 days) Local Daylight Savings Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 10/07/2004 03:37 +0.0 Min Before Ebb Thu 05:57 -0.4 Max Ebb 07:02 -0.3 Max Flood 08:32 -0.4 Max Ebb 10:59 +0.0 Min Before Flood 12:29 +0.3 Max Flood 16:29 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 21:11 -0.4 Max Ebb 23:35 +0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 10/08/2004 00:56 +0.3 Max Flood Fri 02:09 +0.4 Max Ebb 04:41 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 09:24 -0.4 Max Ebb 11:57 +0.0 Min Before Flood 14:56 +0.3 Max Flood 17:30 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 21:57 -0.4 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 10/09/2004 00:32 +0.0 Min Before Flood Sat 03:22 +0.3 Max Flood 05:46 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 10:12 -0.4 Max Ebb 12:56 +0.0 Min Before Flood 15:50 +0.4 Max Flood 18:25 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 22:44 -0.5 Max Ebb [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding the bulk cement carrier, M/V Federal Pescadores, grounded off Port Everglades, Ft
At 1230 September 30, 2004 Shell was notified that there could be a leak in the area of MP Block 151.  An overflight conducted by representatives of Shell, USCG, and NOAA confirmed the spill.  Sheen was observed with a point of origin at L 29d 11.24N, 088d 51.61W and stretched  to the S/SW about 3.8nm down to 29d 07.53N, 088d 53.85W. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened for the Pipeline Leak, Main Pass Block 151, MS spill.
NOAA assisted with multiple incidents on the Mississippi Delta in Louisiana resulting from Hurricane Ivan. [SEP] This spill, which occurs in the Breton National Wildlife Refuge along Raphael Pass consisted of 362 bbls of oil spilled into the marsh due to a leaking tank from the hurricane. On Sept 22nd, LA DEQ, USCG, USFWS, and NOAA met with the ES and H individual representing the RP. Most of the oil has naturally dispersed and moved due to the high water and wind (water at this time, thanks to east winds, was 2-3' above normal high tide). SCAT by boat was done by LA DEQ and NOAA. A good estimate of oil remaining couldn't be established, but most of the oil is gone. I'd estimate maybe 5-10 bbls are left. Most oil observed was sheening (silver and rainbow colored) with patches of black oil found in the reseau cane. The USFWS expressed concern for waterfowl and birds and wishes to have most of the cane that is oiled near the facility cut. The clean up method recommended for the rest of the area and the area surrounding the facility as well was a passive clean up utilizing sorbent boom. 1600' of it was brought out later that day. LA DEQ, USFWS, and USCG are returning Friday for another round of observations. Due to weather there are no ops today. [SEP] Yesterday afternoon there were differences in what the situation was on scene concerning how much oil was on the water. Estimates varied from 25 to 500 bbls. Because of this, response approaches, concerns, etc varied from the different groups. After Shell took over responsibility for the clean up (note, NOT the oil) they contacted the NOAA SSC expressing an interest to use dispersants. Phone calls were made to the appropriate parties for dispersant approval, and before the end of the day on Friday, Sept. 24th, clearances for dispersal application by boat (in depths greater then 20???€?) had been approved by all of the concerned parties except for the EPA (who had yet to respond). At the end of the day Friday, the big issues were the unknowns on what exactly was going on out on scene while the oil continued to leak. An evening overflight conducted by LA DEQ found the thicker oil heading south, with the southern tip estimated at 29d 12.5???€?N, 088d 58.55???€?W. Word from the first morning overflight on Saturday Sept. 25 by DEQ brought news of large amounts of oil in the areas of Lonesome Bayou, North Pass, Pass A Loutre, and Blind Bay. The Coast Guard RRT liason was then contacted and he contacted the EPA who approved the possible use of dispersants by boat or air, so the use of dispersants has been approved by the RRT. The NOAA Scientific Support Team arrived on scene to observe pictures from the morning overflight. There was significant oiling in the areas mentioned above, with oil streaking from the point of origin 29d 15.62???€?N, 089d 01.2???€?W south as far as 29d 09.8???€?N, 88d 01.25???€?W, approximately 6.8 miles from the spill site. The Louisiana Responder was on scene yesterday, the Mississippi Responder and Grand Bay arrived on scene this morning. Decanting has been approved. The plan for use of the skimmers is to have the Mississippi Responder stay close to the leaking source, with the Louisiana Responder behind catching the oil entrained by the Mississippi Responder. The noon overflight by with NOAA on board was similar. There are streaking slicks south from the source down from the edge of North Pass to the westward edge of Lonesome Bay. The oil is then moving thru a cut (that is boomed) down into Pass A Loutre and across a sandbar/marsh area into Blind Bay. The oil in Blind Bay is mostly sheen, but does have some streaking slicks in it. There was little sheen visible west of Lonesome Bay. There was also some oil in the North and South Passes. Shoreline impact has occurred along the Gulf edge near North Pass (east of Lonesome Bay) and in the marsh area between the North and South pass of Pass A Loutre. Booms have been put along the shores of Lonesome Bay as well as in the cuts from Lonesome Bay into Pass A Loutre. There is boom along the northern shore of Pass A Loutre, including in front of the Chevron, Shell, and BP facilities. At 1800 there was a conference call with the on-scene response team and the members of the RRT for the use of dispersants over night. During the day, all effort was made to improve on-water mechanical recovery, but the potential for effective night operations (or lack of effectiveness) propted the considerition of dispersing at night at the source for mitigation. A brief was given to the members of the RRT, including some of the following facts: -The source appears to be leaking less, but still represent a threat to shoreline and wildlife. -The dive ops are planning on starting tomorrow morning, they had difficulty arriving today. -The pipeline where the source is occurring is in 42-43???€? of water. -The location is just under 3 miles from shore -During an overflight today, it was observed by the USFWS that there are roughly 2,000 birds at risk of oiling, 10% or which are already oiled. Hazing was approved and conducted in certain areas. Following all these details, and questions from the RRT concerning dispersant application, the process was approved. A monitoring team is in route to provide federal oversight and every effort will be made to get them on-scene. Dispersants will be applied by the Grand Bay overnight. Assessments may be made by the Gulf Strike Team the next morning depending on logistics. The plan for tomorrow is to check the success of the dispersants at first light, to commence salvage/repair of the pipeline by divers, and to bring in a U-shaped expandable boom to deploy around the source to aid the skimmers with capture. The NOAA Scientific Support Team continues to work the incident. [SEP] A bubbling source was viewed by helicopter at 29d 14.3N, 089d 02.6W. Specifics are not yet known. [SEP] Oil was spotted along the terminal end of the east side of SW Pass. Specifics concerning the amount, type, and coverage area are not yet known. The source is also unknown. The USFWS is monitoring the area closely with concerns for wildlife in the region. [SEP] This spill was estimated at 1 bbl (though it could have been more) and was being actively cleaned by ES and H when USFWS, NOAA, LA DEQ, and USCG reps arrived. The site is located in the Breton NWR. The area was boomed off with containment and sorbent boom and roseau cane that was heavily oiled and bent was being cut and bagged. This spill occured when a tank fell over during the hurricane. The area is small, possibly 1-2 acres, with little overall damage. They had fairly good containment, except for one or two areas which were pointed out to the clean up crew, and immediate action was then taken. The Coast Guard and USFWS will continue to monitor the clean up. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened for Hurricane Ivan Oil Spills, Mississippi Delta. There is one hotline for multiple spills in the MS Delta. [SEP] OK this is a strange one because the winds have been from the E at 20 knots and the oil is reported moving to the SE. Turns out this is possible because the bathymetry is almost W to E. The source is right along the slope and this means there is a current running west to east at the source. Obviously with the windage at about .6 knots, this means the current is gotta be at least 3/4 of the knot or more. I'm guessing as high at 1.5 knots because it is being fed by the strong persistent East winds that will bring water along the coast from the East and from whatever runoff is entering the Gulf from East of the Miss R. This is the only explanation for the oil moving into the wind. So we go with it until proven wrong. The bathymetry turns to the south at the end of Pass A Loutre, at about 6 - 7 miles from the source. This means the current will turn to the south and eventually to the SW. The oil too will turn south. After this happens, the E winds will be perpendicular to the currents and should start moving the oil toward shore. Most likely impacts would be between Blind Bay and Garden I Bay. If the oil is only a few thousand gallons of an API in the mid 30's or higher, it may not persist long enough to impact shore, unless it emulsifies. In fact the 6 mile slick may have reached a steady state where it is evaporating and dispersing as fast as it's leaking. We shall see if this is the case on
A pipeline leak occurred in Mississippi Block 69 offshore of Louisiana. 350 gallons of dispersant were applied to help mitigate the impacts to birds (estimated at 2000. Heavy impacts the the environment and wildlife occurred. [SEP] Incident Weather Forecast FORECAST NO: 6 NAME OF INCIDENT: MP 69 PIPELINE OIL SPILL PREDICTION FOR: DAY SHIFT UNIT: SOUTH OF VENICE, LOUISIANA SHIFT DATE: 10/02/04 SIGNED: TIME AND DATE 0900 CDT, Saturday October 02, 2004 Incident Meteorologist FORECAST ISSUED: NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ WEATHER DISCUSSION: A weak cold front will continue to slowly move through the state today with slight chances for showers near the front. High pressure building into the region will shift winds to the NE behind the front later today into Sunday. The front is expected to slow and stall in the north central gulf Sunday with slight chances of rain continuing near the front into Sunday. The high pressure area will remain in the region Monday with drier conditions expected. Another stronger and reinforcing cold front is expected to move over the area Tuesday. A tropical wave is expected to move into the extreme southwest gulf by mid week increasing NE winds. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ WEATHER FORECAST (36 hours): Winds: Today, SE-S winds around 5 knots early, becoming variable around 5 knots then shifting N-NE 5 to 10 knots in the afternoon. Tonight, NE winds around 5 knots. Sunday, NE winds 5 to 10 knots. _________________________ Seas: Today, 2 feet or less and mostly smooth. Tonight, 2 feet or less and smooth. Sunday, 2 feet or less with a light chop. _________________________ Precipitation: Today, Slight chance of showers. Tonight, Slight chance of showers. Sunday, Slight chance of showers. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies with visibilities reduced in morning haze and afternoon isolated showers. Tonight, partly cloudy skies with visibilities reduced to less than 3 miles in light haze???€?fog and isolated showers. Sunday, partly cloudy skies with visibilities reduced in morning haze and isolated showers. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures to range from highs in the mid 80's to lows in the lower 70???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday, NE-E winds 10 to 15 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Tuesday, NE-E winds 10 to 15 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Sunset (10/02): 1744 High Tide (10/02) 2237 1.6 Sunrise (10/03): 0555 Low Tide (10/03) 0939 0.2 Sunset (10/03): 1743 High Tide (10/03) 2320 1.6 Current Observations: (Boothville - 0900 CDT) Winds Variable 3 knots. (Southwest Pass ???€? 0800 CDT) Winds E 4 knots. (Grand Isle ???€? 0800 CDT) Winds ESE 4 knots. [SEP] Incident Weather Forecast FORECAST NO: 2 NAME OF INCIDENT: MP 69 PIPELINE OIL SPILL PREDICTION FOR: DAY SHIFT UNIT: SOUTH OF VENICE, LOUISIANA SHIFT DATE: 09/30/04 SIGNED: TIME AND DATE 0900 CDT, Thursday September 30, 2004 Incident Meteorologist FORECAST ISSUED: NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ WEATHER DISCUSSION: A stalled and weakening frontal boundary is draped over the north central Gulf of Mexico producing light wind flow and stagnant conditions through Tonight. A cold front is expected to approach the region Friday producing more dominate SE winds. The cold front is expected to pass over the area Saturday morning with chances for rain ahead and along the front. High pressure is expected to build into the region shifting winds to the N behind the front for the rest of the weekend. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ WEATHER FORECAST (36 hours): Winds: Today, NE to E 5 knots or less in the morning then becoming SE winds around Noon at 5 to 10 knots. Tonight, SE-E winds at 5 knots or less. Friday, SE winds 5 to 10 knots becoming S in the afternoon. _________________________ Seas: Today, 2 feet or less with a light chop. Tonight, 1 foot or less and smooth. Friday, 2 feet or less with a light chop. _________________________ Precipitation: Today, Dry. Tonight, Dry. Friday, Dry. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies and hazy conditions with visibilities reduced to less than 3 miles at times in the morning, visibilities improving in the afternoon. Tonight, partly cloudy skies with hazy and foggy conditions continuing reducing visibilities to less than 3 miles at times. Friday, partly cloudy skies with morning haze lifting in the afternoon. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures to range from highs in the mid 80's to lows in the upper 60???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday Night, S-SW winds around 10 knots. Partly to mostly cloudy skies. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Saturday, SW winds around 10 knots shifting NW-N by Noon. Partly to mostly cloudy skies. Scattered mainly morning showers and thunderstorms. Sunday, N to NE winds around 10 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Sunrise (09/30): 0553 Sunset (09/30): 1746 Current Observations: (Boothville - 0800 CDT) Light and variable winds. (Southwest Pass ???€? 0800 CDT) Winds ENE 6 knots. (Grand Isle ???€? 0800 CDT) Winds NE 6 knots. [SEP] Incident Weather Forecast FORECAST NO: 3 NAME OF INCIDENT: MP 69 PIPELINE OIL SPILL PREDICTION FOR: NIGHT SHIFT UNIT: SOUTH OF VENICE, LOUISIANA SHIFT DATE: 09/30/04 SIGNED: TIME AND DATE 1600 CDT, Thursday September 30, 2004 Incident Meteorologist FORECAST ISSUED: NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ WEATHER DISCUSSION: A weak flow pattern in the region is keeping light wind and stagnant conditions over the area through tonight. A cold front is expected to approach the region late Friday producing more dominate SE winds. The cold front is expected to pass over the area Saturday with chances for rain ahead and along the front. The front is expected to slow in the central gulf with high pressure building into the region shifting winds to the N-NE behind the front for the rest of the weekend. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ WEATHER FORECAST (36 hours): Winds: Tonight, E then SE winds 5 knots or less. Friday, SE-S winds 5 to 10 knots. Friday Night, SE-S winds around 5 knots. _________________________ Seas: Tonight, 1 foot or less and smooth. Friday, 2 feet or less with a light chop. Friday Night, 2 feet or less and mostly smooth. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight, Dry. Friday, Slight chance of late afternoon showers and thunderstorms. Friday Night, Slight chance of showers and thunderstorms. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, partly cloudy skies with hazy and foggy conditions reducing visibilities to less than 3 miles at times. Friday, partly cloudy skies with morning haze lifting by the afternoon then partly cloudy with visibilities reduced in isolated late afternoon precipitation. Friday Night, partly to mostly cloudy skies with visibilities reduced in isolated precipitation. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures to range from highs in the mid 80's to lows in the lower 70???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, SW-NW winds 5 to 10 knots shifting N-NE around Noon. Partly to mostly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Sunday, N to NE winds around 10 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. Monday, NE-E winds around 10 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Sunset (09/30): 1746 High Tide (09/30) 2139 1.5 Sunrise (10/01): 0554 Low Tide (10/01) 0726 0.3 Sunset (10/01): 1745 High Tide (10/01) 2203 1.6 Current Observations: (Boothville - 1600 CDT) Winds ENE 7 knots. (Southwest Pass ???€? 1600 CDT) Winds ESE 8 knots. (Grand Isle ???€? 1600 CDT) Winds E 7 knots. [SEP] Evening Report (30 September 2004) At present, the source (the leaking Nakika 18 inch pipeline) is partially controlled by both a soft patch and a pollution dome constructed over the leak designed to collect released oil and continuously pump contained oil to the surface for storage. Overflights conducted by the Unified Command (including overflights with NOAA Scientific Support Team members on-board) reported that the on-water surface slick was reduced compared to previous day???€?s observations and that the location of the slick remains relatively unchanged. There remains a threat to the environment and there is the potential for additional pollution release during planned pipeline repair activities. Given the need for accurate weather and oil trajectory forecasting, a National Weather Service Forecaster and an oceanographer from the NOAA HAZMAT team were brought on-scene. In addition, two members of the NOAA Damage Assessment Center have been added to the on-scene NOAA Team to support the USCG and the Unified Command. The on-scene team is currently composed on six NOAA team members). Today (and yesterday) there has been very little wind and only weak surface currents to move the oil that had escaped primary containment and recovery activities. Most of the remaining surface oil is located at the boundary of several weak convergence lines. The actual amount of oil remaining on the surface is difficult to estimate. Clearly, there is less oil on the surface today that yesterday, but there remains enough oil to constitute a continued threat to shoreline habitat at Pass a Loutre and Southeast Pass. Additional skimmer systems have been deployed and surveillance overflights continue. Many of the birds in the immediate area have hazed to locations away from
In the early morning hours Sept. 21, 2004, vandals severed the fuel hoses feeding into the Auke Bay marina releasing both diesel and gasoline into the marina.   Before the valves were secured, 1600 gallons of diesel and 50 gallons off gasoline were released into the marina.   On scene weather was calm winds with locally heavy rains.   The gasoline dispersed and evaporated within a couple of hours. The diesel was a bit more persistant with patchy sheens persisting for 2-3 days.  Ultimately a light wind dispersed the remaining diesel but not before threatening some nearby eel grass beds.
F/V drift; 2 onboard; rescued OK; WX/Verbal
Mystery black stubstance off Oregon Coast. A black patch has been reported about 60 miles off of Newport Oregon.  It extends from about 45deg 5.89' N by 125deg 30.62'W to 44deg 41.37'N to 125deg 26.3' W.  This is approximately 35 miles long and oriented parallel to the coastline. [SEP] I work with the NOAA HAZMAT office in Seattle. We received a report (see below) of a large "oil spill" off the Oregon Coast, about 65nm west of Newport. I understand that Atlantis is presently doing research on harmful algal blooms in this vicinity and as I am thinking that this may be such an event, I would love to confirm this fact with ground truth. The USCG has sent a helicopter out and conducted an overflight and obtained video of the "slick". If indeed this is a HAB, I suspect that your researchers would be interested in perhaps obtaining this footage and comparing it to what they observe. My only interest in this is to confirm that the "slick" is indeed NOT oil. The USCG Air Station Astoria will send another overflight out tomorrow with a still camera to obtain more data. I would appreciate it if you could forward this message to the ship. Thank you, Demian Bailey, LT/NOAA Asst. Scientific Support Coordinator NOAA HAZMAT Response Office of Response and Restoration From: "Bratcher, Norval MST3" <NBratcher@PACNORWEST.USCG.mil> Date: September 21, 2004 15:41:23 PDT To: "'demian.bailey@noaa.gov'" <demian.bailey@noaa.gov> Cc: "Castaneda, Xochitl L. LTJG" <XCastaneda@PACNORWEST.USCG.mil>, "Klarmann, Robin MSTC" <RKlarmann@PACNORWEST.USCG.mil> Subject: black thick smudgy substance 60nm off the Oregon coast Black thick smudgy substance 60nm off the Oregon coast. Northern most point 4505.89n 12530.62w Southern most thickest point 4455.89n 12528.5w Southern most point 4441.37n 12536.3w One description was brown sludge, looks like oil, smells like fuel. No VSL, No Debris, No Distress calls in the area. &#65532; [SEP] MYSTERY SPILL, 60 MILES WEST OF NEWPORT, OR 1530 PDT, Tuesday September 21, 2004 Sunset (9/21): 1820 Sunrise (9/22): 0610 Sunset (9/22): 1818 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight through Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the N at 10-15 knots. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Wednesday, no precipitation is forecast in the region. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Wednesday, partly cloudy skies are predicted. _____________________________________ Seas: Tonight through Wednesday, the seas are predicted to be 3-5 feet. _____________________________________ Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the upper 50's to lows in the mid 50's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the N at 15-20 knots. Partly cloudy skies are forecast. No precipitation is expected in the region. Seas, 4-6. Friday, the winds are predicted to be from the N at 15-20 knots. Partly cloudy skies are forecast. No precipitation is expected in the region. Seas, 4-6. [SEP] Date: Sept 21, 2004 To: NOAA SSC Ruth Yender/Demian Baily FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery black stubstance off Oregon Coast FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ Reported scenario: A black patch has been reported about 60 miles off of Newport Oregon. It extends from about 45deg 5.89' N by 125deg 30.62'W to 44deg 41.37'N to 125deg 26.3' W. This is approximately 35 miles long and oriented parallel to the coastline. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds are expected to be from the North into Saturday. 2) Trajectory Information The location of the dark patch is in 2700 to 2800 meters of water. This is at the western edge of the shelf break and outside of any coastal currents. The mean currents along the shelf break(California Current) is to the south. West of the shelf break, currents are weak and variable most of the time. If the black substance is floating, like oil, we would expect it to move to the south under the influence of the wind at about 1/3 to 1/2 knot through Friday. We do not foresee any landfall within the next 4 - 5 days. Beyond that, we can't forecast. If the last few decades we have had a handful of oil spills occur west of the shelf break, off the Washington-Oregon coast, and there has never been any reported landfall from any of them. If the black patch is not floating, like an algal bloom, the winds will not have a direct effect on the movement of the substance. In this case we would expect the patch to remain in the vicinity over the next few days. It should be point out that the thermal image of the northwest found at http://www.osdpd.noaa.gov/PSB/EPS/SST/data/washngtn.c.gif shows an upwelling event (cold water) between 44deg and 45deg north. Often, algal blooms are associated with upwelling events.
Fishing vessel grounded when pillot went to sleep t the wheel during a fishing opening in SE Alaska.  Shoreline was very rugged and rocky, but no fuel was released.  400 gals of diesel were removed by the owner at a later date.   NOAA support:  weather, fate and trajectory of possible release, tidal data.
Phosporic; acid; hurricane; Verbal/DAC response [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the Cargill acid spill in Tampa, FL.
Barge Kirby 7304 had a stuck valve and leaked Isoprene. A .25 mile safety/exclusion zone was established near the town of Brusley, LA. The product was safely offloaded and flushed with inert gas. There were no injuries. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the Kirby Barge #7304 in Brusley, LA reported to be leaking C5 distillate. [SEP] On 26 August 2004, the NOAA was notified of a barge releasing gases from a pressure relief/vent value (PV) that was apparently stuck in the open position. The barge, identified as Kirby 7304, was located at a fleeting area on the Mississippi River near the town of Brusley, Louisiana. Two elementary schools were evacuated and a safety/exclusion zone of 0.25 miles was established. The product was a mixture of very light distillates with an extremely narrow boiling point range around C5 (pentane). The most abundant chemical in the mixture was isoprene, and the product was reported to have an average boiling point of 85??F. The product was extremely flammable with a LEL of only 1.4%. In the hot summer afternoon, the barge temperature was clearly above the products boiling point resulting in excess pressure and venting. NOAA was request to provide on-scene scientific support to MSU Baton Rouge to include weather, chemistry consultation, and modeling. Two questions were identified. The first was to insure that the cause was a stuck valve and not a runaway polymerization problem. The second was to develop a strategy should the attempt to reset the valve fail. NOAA work with the USCG consulting the product manufactures representatives as to the potential for polymerization complicating the situation. It was determined that the barge was used solely for this product and that the product had been treated with an inhibitor to reduce the risk. The final conclusion from the experts was that the potential for a reaction to create or complicate the proposed response was low (as the RP???€?s chemist stated, never say never). If resetting the value failed, several options were investigated to mitigate the threat such as the application of a water spray during the evening hours. Fortunately, the HAZMAT team was able to make an entry and reseat the value at approximately 0630 hours. The barge was off-loaded at a near-by facility and inerted with nitrogen gas. The barge would require cleaning and gas freeing before inspection and repairs could be made. No addition support was requested from NOAA. There were no reported injuries or releases in the river. [SEP] KIRBY BARGE #7304, BATON ROUGE, LOUISIANA 1000 CDT, Friday August 27, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (08/27): 1918 Sunrise (08/28): 0627 Sunset (08/28): 1917 Current Observation: (Baton Rouge ???€? 1000 CDT) the winds are from the east at 5 knots. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 4-5 knots. Tonight, east winds at 1-3 knots are predicted. Saturday, SW winds at less than 5 knots are forecast. _________________________ Precipitation: Today, scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms are expected. Tonight, dry weather is predicted. Saturday, scattered to numerous showers and thunderstorms are forecast. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies are expected to diminish to mostly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Tonight, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Saturday, mostly cloudy skies are forecast. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 90's to lows in the 70's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be light and variable. Mostly cloudy skies. Numerous showers and thunderstorms. Monday, north winds at 5 knots are predicted. Partly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms becoming isolated by the evening hours. Tuesday, N-NE winds at 7-10 knots are forecast. Partly cloudy skies. Isolated showers and thunderstorms.
The Delta Star, a 72' Tug struck a buoy in the jetty entrance to Sabine Pass and released its fuel. No fuel was ever found. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the Tug Delta Star that allided with a navigation buoy in Sabine Pass, TX. [SEP] Initial and Final Report At approximately 0650 hrs (CDT) on Sunday, 22 August 2004, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified that the Tug DELTA STAR had allied with a buoy within the jetty entrance to Sabine Pass due to a loss of steerage. The location of the accident was reported to be Buoy 21 or 22 (the buoys are across the pass from each other and do not represent mile markers); that position places the accident approximately 1 nautical mile off Louisiana Point, Louisiana. The DELTA STAR, a 72' vessel, was reported to have had 2,500 gallons of #2 Fuel Oil (diesel) on board at the time of the allision. Shortly after the accident, the vessel was towed into the pass and up the ship channel to a facility near Pleasure Island, Texas. The initial USCG investigation reported that essentially all of the fuel had been lost before the vessel arrived in port. Containment around the vessel was ordered as pumps were maintained to control flooding. Sheens were observed near the vessel. The SSC was requested to provide assistance as to the probable trajectory and fate of the spilled diesel fuel. By chance, the SSC was at a hotel across the street from the MSO and was able to respond on-scene immediately. Trajectory and Mass Balance The NOAA C-Man station at Sabine, Texas reported on-shore SSE winds at 16 to 18 kts at the time of the allision shifting to S at 17 to 19 kts at around 0400 hrs (CDT). ADIOS2, NOAA's oil weathering model, predicted, that if most of the oil was lost near the buoy, after six hours only 12% would remain on the surface (the rest being lost to evaporation and natural dispersion). Given that the winds were out of the SSE, the surface slick would move through the jetty, possibly toward Texas Point, Texas (a highly sensitive area). The predicted tides would have little effect on surface transport. The jetty, itself, would enhance dissipation of the surface slick by increasing diffusion and natural dispersion. It would be unlikely that any appreciable quantity of diesel would persist for more than 1 nautical mile from the release point (Texas Point is less than a nautical mile from Buoys 21 and 22). If oil continued to leak as the vessel was towed into the pass, the Louisiana Point and Lighthouse Bayou (both highly sensitive areas) would be at risk. Overflight Surveillance The USCG conducted an overflight of the scene between 0730 and 0815 hrs the same morning. No oil pollution was observed in the lower pass, but a small sheen was observed further up the ship channel and some sheen was observed around the vessel. The observers suspect that the observed sheen in the channel was unrelated to the DELTA STAR incident. Given that no residual surface oil pollution was observed, no addition additional support was requested. The NOAA SSC will follow-up with notifications to the NOAA Injury Assessment Coordinator for Texas and the NMFS Habitat Conservation Office in Galveston, Texas.
At 0530 on August 2, 2004, the NOAA Scientific Support Team was requested by MSOPort Arthur for an oil spill in the Natchez River in Texas. The T/V Torm Mary was struck by a fuel barge readying to load, leaving roughly a5'x 1' crack in the Torm Mary .  The area hit covered part of the engine room and part of a fuel tank, spilling some of the IFO 380 into the engine room.  The 258 metric ton fuel container that was cracked was estimated at 95% full before the collision and twenty minutes later, at 0040only 50% full, with an estimated 110 metric tons of oil outside the vessel. On-water recovery and shoreline clean up was employed.  280 bbls of oil were recovered and miles of shoreline were cleaned over a 3 week period. [SEP] Note that the trajectory does not take into account booming or skimming. It does not take into account oil interacting with the sediment load. [SEP] 100_0539.JPG - East of Bird Island 100_0545.JPG - Facility west of Port Neches Park 100_0547.JPG - Facility west of Port Neches Park 100_0548.JPG - Unocal pier 100_0549.JPG - Unocal pier [SEP] Overflight maps [SEP] Overflight map 08/04 0815 [SEP] Update (18 August) Spill response is often filled with defeated expectations; Tuesday, 17 August was one such day on the Neches River Spill. The Unified Command met at the Unocal facility for a final walk through that Tuesday morning. The expectations were that a few locations would require additional active cleanup, but the spill management team believed that most of the cleanup had progressed to the maintenance phase. Unfortunately, the conditions had changed (or were not nearly as complete as thought) and there was free floating oil and sheen along the entire shoreline at Unocal. The source of this new, or newly released, oil is thought to have been a combination of sources: oil under Unocal Dock #1, riprap cleaning, and a small marsh area east of Unocal where passive recover had been removed (prematurely). A deep draft vessel had recently docked and may have freed oil into the river combined with a lower than predicted morning tide. The response posture immediately changed back to containment and recovery around the Unocal facility. Clearly, too much containment was removed too early (hind-sight is always 20/20). The amount of oil lost from the site was not major, but beyond our expectation. On the afternoon of 17 August, SCAT resurveyed and segmented the Unocal facility, identify cleanup locations, developed a plan for additional cleanup, and will monitor operations. Twenty segments were created to monitor work progress. The NOAA SSC will remain on-scene until the maintenance plans are finalized. [SEP] NECHES RIVER SPILL, PORT NECHES, TEXAS 1430 CDT, Friday August 6, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (08/06): 2005 Sunrise (08/07): 0639 Sunset (08/07): 2004 Current Observation: (Beaumont ???€? 1430 CDT) winds are calm. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected be from the NE at 5-10 knots. Saturday, NE winds at 10 knots are predicted. Saturday night, NE winds at 5 knots are forecast. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Saturday night, no precipitation is expected. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Saturday, mostly sunny skies are forecast. Saturday night, mostly clear skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to unrestricted. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 90's to lows in the 70's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the E-NE at less than 5 knots shifting to be from the SE at 5 knots by the afternoon hours. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Monday through Tuesday, E-NE winds at less than 5 knots are predicted to shift and be from the SE at less than 5 knots. Partly cloudy skies. Possible isolated afternoon showers. [SEP] Sun Anchorage Oil Spill, PORT NECHES, TEXAS 0700 CDT, Monday August 2, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (08/02): 2008 Sunrise (08/03): 0637 Sunset (08/03): 2007 Current Observation: (Sabine C-Man ? 0500 CDT) winds from the NNE at 6 knots. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the east at 5 knots or less increasing to 10 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight through Tuesday, light and variable winds are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Today, isolated afternoon showers and thunderstorms are forecast. Tonight, dry weather is expected. Tuesday, isolated showers and thunderstorms are predicted. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tuesday, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is predicted to unrestricted except during times of rain. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 90's to lows in the 70's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the west at 5 knots or less shifting to be from the SW at 5-10 knots by the afternoon hours. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Thursday, SW winds at 5-10 knots are predicted. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Friday, west winds at 5-10 knots are forecast to shift and be from the north at 5-10 knots by the afternoon hours. Partly cloudy skies. Isolated showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] 100_0507.JPG - T/V Torm Mary 100_0515.JPG - Rainbow Bridge looking into Sabine Lake 100_0516.JPG - Star Lake Canal 100_0519.JPG - South of Port Neches Park 100_0522.JPG - East of Unocal Facility 100_0523.JPG - Unocal Facility [SEP] Just after midnight tonight will mark Day 21 (three weeks) into the TORM MARY oil spill and response. Cleanup has progressed such that only one mile of shoreline remains in the active cleanup phase. That site, the Unocal facility on the S shore of the Neches River was one of the heaviest impacted areas. Most of the shoreline is armored with concrete riprap, and oil coated a 1 to 3 foot band along most of the facility property and the marsh immediately downstream. Oil not only covered the exposed surfaces, but also coated the unexposed underside surfaces and pooled oil was observed in between the crevices and loose gravel under the larger riprap structures. There are also numerous man-made structures such as moorings, piers, pilings, and a boat ramp at the Unocal facility that were also oiled and for a short period were sources of secondary pollution until the entire area was completely isolated using hard boom. Cleanup continues using a combination of a chemical shoreline cleaning agent (PES-51) with low pressure flushing, high-pressure hot water cleaning, and passive recovery. Most of the effort has reached a state of minimum return and only passive recovery was planned for the weekend before a reassessment on Monday or Tuesday (weather and tide dependant). The underside of the largest dock and pier remain a problem to cleanup efforts. While the dock platform is high enough to facilitate deep draft vessels, there is a lower series of platforms that are used to facilitate numerous pipelines making under-the-dock access nearly impossible except at extremely low tides. Multiple attempts at flushing seem to have removed the surface oil. The underside dock cobble shoreline has been cleaned twice, once with CytoSol and once with PES-51. Each cleaning results is acceptable levels of surface washing, but oil that had seep into the cobble continues to slowly leach out (possible enhanced by the effect of the chemical agents). ???€?It seems that every time we think that we make good progress under the dock, more free floating oil is observed and the cobble shoreline appears reoiled.???€? The NOAA SSC remains on-scene at the request of the FOSC to continue to monitor cleanup activities and assess progress. The Environmental unit has drafted a detailed plan to shift the operation from an active response into the maintenance phase early next week. The NOAA SSC has also participated in discussion with the Natural Resource Damage Assessment Trustees. A field trip with the trustees is planned for Wednesday, 25 August. NOAA is also been request to provide the Regional Response Team with written reports as to the testing and use of the different shoreline cleaning agents. [SEP] Attached is a pdf of the approved cleanup end-points. [SEP] Overflight maps [SEP] 100_0556.JPG - T/V Torm Mary 100_0558.JPG - Closeup of hole in tank of T/V Torm Mary 100_0561.JPG - Unocal Pier 100_0562.JPG - Unocal Pier 100_0583.JPG - Port Neches Park staging area 100_0585.JPG - Two skimmers working in oil 100_0589.JPG - Port Neches Park oiled boom and riprap 100_0591.JPG - Port Neches Park oiled snares
The Clipper Odyessy unexpectedly grounded on an uncharted rock immediately west of the Baby Islands just east of Unalaska Island.  The grounding occurred at approximately 9:30 pm on July 31, 2004, rupturing only the forward fuel tank which contained about 5000 gallons of diesel, all of which was released.   At the time of the grounding, 196 passengers were on board the Clipper Odyssey.   These passengers were all evacuated via local fishing vessel, etc. from Dutch Harbor and transported back to Dutch Harbor.  With the assistance of two tugs, the salvor Magone Marine stabilized the vessel early morning of Aug. 1 after which it proceded to Dutch Harbor.  Oil containment boom was placed around the vessel upon arrival in Dutch Harbor.  Diesel fuel was reportedly leaking from the damaged #1 port tank immediately after the grounding and enroute to Dutch Harbor.  The response contractor, Chadux, was activated and pre-staged response equipment in Dutch Harbor.  The Baby Islands are part of the US Maritime National Wildlife Refuge and as such are loaded with a variety of birds.   No oiled birds were observed, however, the IBRRC was alerted.   NOAA provided support in the form of weather forecasts, tidal current information, trajectories of the diesel release, and resources at risk information.
A collision occurred between the T/B Mr.Craig and the M/T Eagle Memphis in the Mississippi Riverr, near mm 93 (SE of NO). While overtaking the tug, the M/T was hit on her starboard quarter, resultingin a 13ft gash in her #2 starboard fuel tank.  The vessel's Chief Engineerreported that 50 bbls of heavy fuel oil were spilled into the river before theoil was safely transferred. Sheen was observed  from 29d56.3'N 090d 0.05'W to 29d 55.3'N 089d 57.5'W.  Approximately 10 bbls of the sheenended up near shore, mm83, where there was 2000' of boom.  An OSRO cleaned up the oil. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] A hotline has been opened to capture information about the collision between the M/T Eagle Memphis and the T/B Mr. Craig, Port Neches, TX. [SEP] Yesterday, at approximately 1330 CDT a collision occurred between the T/B Mr. Craig and the M/T Eagle Memphis in the Mississippi River, near mm 93 (SE of NO). While overtaking the tug, the M/T was hit on her starboard quarter, resulting in a 13ft gash in her #2 starboard fuel tank. The vessel???€?s Chief Engineer reported that 50 bbls of heavy fuel oil were spilled into the river before the oil was safely transferred. There were no injuries and a section of the river was closed for approximately 2.5 hours. Both vessels are currently anchored nearby. MSO New Orleans has individuals on scene. CGAS New Orleans flew two over flights yesterday, and is underway on it???€?s third. Sheen was observed from 29d 56.3???€?N 090d 0.05W to 29d 55.3N 089d 57.5W. Approximately 10 bbls of the sheen has ended up near shore, mm83, where there is 2000???€? of boom. Another 2000???€? is on standby, as well as a skimming vessel. The OSRO plans on completing the clean-up by the end of today. The NOAA SSC is waiting for results from the most recent overflight. A site visit is currently scheduled for Monday morning pending the overflight info. [SEP] M/T EAGLE MEMPHIS COLLISION, MISSISSIPPI RIVER, NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA 1130 CST, Friday July 30, 2004 Sunset (07/30):1957 Sunrise (07/31):0619 Sunset (07/31):1953 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are expected to be light and variable. Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the E to SE at 5-10 knots. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Saturday, calm seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Saturday, scattered showers and thunderstorms are predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, partly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is forecast to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Today through Saturday, the high temperature is expected to be in the low to mid 90???€?s with low???€?s in the upper 70???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the E to SE at 10-15 knots. Seas choppy. Partly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms. Monday, the winds are forecast to be from the N to NE at 10-15 knots. Seas choppy. Partly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. _____________________________________ Hydrology (Mississippi River???€?New Orleans): The surface velocity is expected to be 3.0 knots during the next few days.
On 07/27/2004, the SSC was notified of a barge grounding on the SaintLawrence Seaway.   The Canadian flagged, barge KTC-115 broke free from its tugduring a steering failure.   Before the tug could recover the KTC 115, itgrounded on Frontenac Shoal in position 44deg 20.408' N 075deg 55.508' W nearAlexander Bay NY.  KTC-115 contained 35% calcium chloride solution.   The bargesustained damage to the starboard tank, which contained 170,000 gallons.  Over12,000 gallons spilled from the tank before it reached equilibrium.Divers found three cracks near the starboard bow.NOAA provided a worst case scenario for a release of the product. [SEP] This morning(07/27) the SSC was notified of a barge grounding on the Saint Lawrence Seaway. The Canadian flagged, barge KTC-115 broke free from its tug during a steering failure. Before the tug could recover the KTC ???€? 115, it grounded on Frontenac Shoal in position 44?? 20.408' N 075?? 55.508' W near Alexander Bay NY. KTC-115 contained 35% calcium chloride solution. The barge sustained damage to the starboard tank, which contained 170,000 gallons. Over 12,000 gallons spilled from the tank before it reached equilibrium. The tank continues to take on approximately 1/8 inch of water per hour. Divers found three cracks near the starboard bow. Burlap wrapped wedges were placed in those cracks accessible to the divers. A lightering barge is expected to arrive on scene Friday morning. The USCG requested that NOAA HAZMAT determine the at worst case release of the total contents of the starboard tank. No further NOAA assistance is needed at this time. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the grounded barge in the Saint Lawrence River. [SEP] St. Lawrence Seaway ???€? Barge aground on Frontenac Shoals The USCG estimated 12,000 gallons of Calcium chloride (CaCl2) in 35% solution leaked from a barge hard aground on the Frontenac Shoals, 44?? 20.04???€? N, 075?? 55.508???€? W. An estimated 158,000 gallons remain onboard. The USCG asked what would be the consequences of losing the rest of the cargo. The spill is located near the deep water channel of the St. Lawrence River. The specific gravity of the calcium chloride solution (35%) is 1.35 relative to freshwater, so the product will sink (on the order of minutes) as it leaks from the vessel. The estimated flow of the river is approximately 7600 m3/s (230,000 ft3/s) which will help mix and dilute the product. However, the product will move along the bottom of the river, and will hinder mixing and dilution. Resources at Risk: Water intakes: There are several water intakes in the spill area. The primary intake is the Alexandria Bay Municipal Drinking water intake is located at the spill site. There are several fish species expected in the area which will be acutely sensitive to high concentrations of the product. For example, the 96 hr LC50 for juvenile bluegill is 8 ppt (ECOTOX). For freshwater snails, the 48 hr LC50 is 3 ppt. Resources at risk will be those that are in the deeper areas of the river. In depressions in the channel, the product will be more persistent. Recommendations: The remaining product should be lightered, if possible. If the only means of removing the product is by releasing it to the environment, the pumping rate should be low enough to keep concentrations below 100 ppm on the bottom. This is an order of magnitude below toxicity endpoints in test species.
pipeline burp; 10's of bbls; crude; WxPipeline rupture cause the release of 50-100 bbls. Clean-up procedures followed [SEP] PIPELINE SPILL, LAKE GRANDE ECAILLE, LOUISIANA 1430 CDT, Thursday July 22, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (07/22): 1957 Sunrise (07/23): 0615 Sunset (07/23): 1957 Current Observation: (Grand Isle C-Man - 1400 CDT) winds from the N at 4 knots. Current Observation: (Boothville - 1400 CDT) winds from the E-NE at 5 knots. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be variable at 2 knots. Tonight, west winds at 5-10 knots are predicted. Friday, west winds at 5-10 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NW at 5-10 knots by the evening hours. _________________________ Waves (In Protected Waters): Today through Friday, smooth seas are expected. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Friday, isolated showers and thunderstorms are predicted. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, mostly clears skies are forecast. Tonight, partly cloudy skies are expected. Friday, mostly clear skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be unrestricted except during times of showers. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the north at 10 knots. Seas light chop in protected waters. Partly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Sunday, NE winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas choppy in protected waters. Mostly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Monday, west winds at 10 knots are forecast. Seas light chop in protected waters. Mostly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] At 1145 CDT a spill estimated of 50-100 bbls of crude oil was reported to the NOAA SSC by MSO New Orleans. The spill, due to a pipeline rupture, is located near Lake Grand Ecaille at 29d 23???€?30???€?N and 089d 47???€?55???€?W. The Coast Guard sent up an over flight at 1515 CDT. The current weather predictions are for light and variable winds increasing to westerly 5-10k tonight with scattered showers and thunderstorms. The NOAA Scientific Support team is currently standing by for further information. [SEP] Attached are a few pictures from the spill... [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the pipeline spill in the vicinity of Lake Grande Ecaille, LA. [SEP] Attached (hopefully) is the final report along with two pictures from the incident. [SEP] Okay... maybe this one will show up???? [SEP] Attached are a few pictures from the spill... [SEP] Resources at Risk for Lake Grande Etaille, LA This report was prepared on 22 July 2004. Information in this report is based on the assumption that a pipeline release of approximately 50-100 bbls occurred in Lake Grande Etaille in northeast Barataria Bay (29&#8734; 23.5???€? N, 89&#8734; 47.55 W). This report does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for spill location information. Habitats Habitats in Lake Grande Etaille and northeast Barataria Bay are mostly salt marsh. Birds There are at least six colonial waterbird nesting colonies in the vicinity of Big Island in Barataria Bay (within 3 miles of assumed release site). Approximate counts of species nesting and feeding in the area are: black-crowned night-heron (22 birds), Forster???€?s tern (330 birds), great egret (62 birds), snowy egret (30 birds), tricolored heron (80 birds), little blue heron (8 birds), black skimmer (8 birds), and reddish egret (1 bird). July is the end of the breeding season for most species, so fledglings are likely present on and around the nests. Mottled duck may be nesting in marshes. Fish and Invertebrates Several species of fish may be present in the area. Very abundant species include: Atlantic croaker (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, juveniles), bay anchovy (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles), gulf menhaden (juveniles), and spot (juveniles). Abundant species include: red drum (juveniles), sand seatrout (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles), sheepshead (larvae and juveniles), southern flounder (juveniles), spotted seatrout (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles), and striped mullet (juveniles). Very abundant invertebrate species present in the area include: blue crab (eggs, larvae, juveniles), brown shrimp (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles), and white shrimp (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles). Oyster lease sites occur in the area. Essential fish habitat (EFH) occurs in Gulf of Mexico estuaries for brown shrimp, white shrimp, red drum, Spanish mackerel, cobia, and bluefish. Reptiles and Aquatic Mammals Juvenile and adult alligators are transient in salt marshes, and several species of aquatic furbearers are residents (raccoon, mink, muskrat, river otter, and nutria). [SEP] Attached are a few pictures from the spill... [SEP] Attached are a few pictures from the spill... [SEP] Attached are a few pictures from the spill...
gasoline barge; aground; no spill; Notification
At 1800 hrs on the evening of 9 July 2004, the NOAA SSC was notified of a wellblowout in Barataria Bay, Louisiana.  The initial report to the USCG was of oilspraying 300' into the air from a wellhead.  As additional information becameavailable, the magnitude of the problem was much less than originally reported. The release was caused by a pipeline value failure on a small platform locatedat 29deg 04' 39" N Lat. 090deg 52' 14" W Long.  Because of the pressure in the line,the release did create a visible plume, but very little oil was released.  TheRP reported that only about 30 gallons was actually lost.  A small slick wasobserved at the platform and moving toward open water.  An overflight by theUSCG identified no oil (or no oil observations of any significance).  The lightsheen probably dissipated rapidly.  NOAA did provide weather and trajectorysupport based on the initial reports of a potential major oil release. [SEP] Initial and Final Report At 1800 hrs on the evening of 9 July 2004, the NOAA SSC was notified of a well blowout in Barataria Bay, Louisiana. The initial report to the USCG was of oil spraying 300???€? into the air from a wellhead. As additional information became available, the magnitude of the problem was much less than originally reported. The release was caused by a pipeline value failure on a small platform located at 29?? 04???€? 39???€? N Lat. 090?? 52???€? 14???€? W Long. Because of the pressure in the line, the release did create a visible plume, but very little oil was released. The RP reported that only about 30 gallons was actually lost. A small slick was observed at the platform and moving toward open water. An overflight by the USCG identified no oil (or no oil observations of any significance). The light sheen probably dissipated rapidly. NOAA did provide weather and trajectory support based on the initial reports of a potential major oil release. [SEP] To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry / MSO Morgan City From: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Pipeline Release in Lake Pelto. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a pipeline valve leak in Lake Pelto, Louisiana. These notes are based on the following information: On July 9th 2004, there was a release for an unknown period from a pipeline located at 29??04???€?39???€? N, 90??52???€?14???€? W in Lake Pelto, near Whiskey Pass, LA. It is unknown when the release began, and it was shut down at about 6:10pm July 9th. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WIND: Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the SE at 10 knots. Tomorrow, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 8 knots. Tomorrow night, S winds at 5 knots are expected. 2) TRAJECTORY The NOS tidal predictions for this area indicate there was a low tide at about 5:30 pm near the time of the release. The next high tide is at about 5:30 am the next morning. The result is that at the time near the release, and for the following 10 hrs or so, tidal currents will tend to move any released oil into Caillou Bay, and not carry it out beyond the barrier islands. If the release began earlier than about 4:00pm, tidal currents could have moved the oil toward the southwest, potentially outside of the barrier islands. The wind is forecast to be primarily from the south and southeast, which will move the oil toward shore, and to the northwest. We expect the shore near the release could be oiled, and shoreline oiling could occur as far to the northwest as Taylor???€?s Bayou by Saturday evening, if the oil persists. [SEP] LAKE PELTO OIL SPILL, LOUSIANA 1900 CDT, Friday July 9, 2004 Sunset (7/9): 2005 Sunrise (7/10): 0612 Sunset (7/10): 2005 NOTE: This is a site-specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the SE at 10 knots. Tomorrow, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 8 knots. Tomorrow night, S winds at 5 knots are expected. _____________________________________ Waves: Tonight through tomorrow night, the seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through tomorrow night, a chance of showers and thunderstorms are predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Tomorrow, mostly cloudy skies are forecast in the afternoon, becoming partly cloudy overnight. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the upper 80s to lows in the low 80s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, S winds at 5 knots are predicted, becoming SW at 8 knots overnight. Seas are expected to be 1 foot. Partly cloudy skies are forecast, with a chance of showers and thunderstorms. Monday, NW winds at 5 knots are forecast. Seas are predicted to be 1 foot. Partly cloudy skies are forecast, with a slight chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] > Hotline has been opened for the Lake Pelto Oil Spill, Louisiana Coast..
NOAA provided telephone support for a mystery spill in Mexico. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
missing F/V; investigation; Verbal
Sector Honolulu called to get weather and a verbal trajectory for a mystery slick (or potentially algal bloom) on the west side of the big island of Hawaii off Kailua-Kona.  Mystery slick or algal bloom was reported to be approximately 8 nm offshore, 300 by 300 yards in size, and appeared to be balck oil like Bunker C subsurface.
clean-up assessment, flush and vacuum products and cut heavily oiled plants [SEP] On the morning (0930) of 22 June 2004, the NOAA SSC was notified by the Ohio Spill Planning Prevention and Emergency Response Association (OSPPERA) that a truck and a van collision had resulted in both vehicles coming to rest in an arrowhead plant (Sagittaria sp.) dominated marsh. The truck fuel tanks and lube oils had leaked resulting in a 200 gallon spill. Ohio EPA and OSPPERA had requested information on the possibility of using insitu burning to remove the oil. The accident site was within the Magee Marsh Wildlife Area and the State wanted the oil removed. Due to the proximity to residences and the accessibility of the oil, burning was ruled out as an option. The SSC arrived on scene around 1200. Prior to the arrival, the decision had been made and the contractors had commenced to cut the oiled vegetation and vacuum the remaining floating product. Dr. Jacqui Michel of RPI was contacted to determine impacts of this strategy. It was her opinion that flushing should be attempted prior to cutting. If flushing was ineffective, only those plants heavily oiled should be removed. Although Arrowhead is a nearly indestructible perennial, some portion of the plant needs to remain above the water surface for oxygen exchange to ensure survival. Based on this input, the Ohio EPA rep. requested the cleanup crews flush as much product out as possible, cut only the heavily oiled plants and leave some of the plant material above the waterline. Absorbent booms will remain in place until the area no longer sheens. The SSC departed the scene at 1400 hours. No further NOAA support is needed at this time. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the truck collision and spill, Magee Marsh, OH. [SEP] On the morning (0930) of 22 June 2004, the NOAA SSC was notified by the Ohio Spill Planning Prevention and Emergency Response Association (OSPPERA) that a truck and a van collision had resulted in both vehicles coming to rest in an arrowhead plant (Sagittaria sp.) dominated marsh. The truck fuel tanks and lube oils had leaked resulting in a 200 gallon spill. Ohio EPA and OSPPERA had requested information on the possibility of using insitu burning to remove the oil. The accident site was within the Magee Marsh Wildlife Area and the State wanted the oil removed. Due to the proximity to residences and the accessibility of the oil, burning was ruled out as an option. The SSC arrived on scene around 1200. Prior to the arrival, the decision had been made and the contractors had commenced to cut the oiled vegetation and vacuum the remaining floating product. Dr. Jacqui Michel of RPI was contacted to determine impacts of this strategy. It was her opinion that flushing should be attempted prior to cutting. If flushing was ineffective, only those plants heavily oiled should be removed. Although Arrowhead is a nearly indestructible preferential, some portion of the plant needs to remain above the water surface for oxygen exchange to ensure survival. The Ohio EPA rep. requested the clean crews flush as much product out as possible, cut only the heavily oiled plants and leave some of the plant material above the waterline. Absorbent booms will remain in place until the area no longer sheens. The SSC departed the scene at 1400 hours. No further NOAA support is needed at this time.
Vessel lost steerage, but not power. Continued to drift until it grounded on shallow rock reef/ledge. 2-3 days after grounding the vessel unexpectedly caught fire and burned to the water line - M/V Capt Jack was an older wooden vessel. Approx. 50 gallons of diesel released from the day tank causing considerable sheening. Later, a landing craft was able to pump out 2400 gals of diesel from main fuel tanks which were below the water level when vessel burned and not compromised. NOAA support was weather, trajectories from Seattle, tidal heights and currents. [SEP] CAPTAIN JACK YACHT GROUNDING, SUMNER STRAIT, ALASKA 0840 ADT, Saturday June 12, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (06/12): 2139 Sunrise (06/13): 0410 Sunset (06/13): 2141 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 10-12 knots with gusts to 15 knots shifting to be from the S-SE at 10 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, S-SE winds at 10 knots are predicted. Sunday, variable winds at less than 10 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Sunday, 4-6 foot seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, possible afternoon scattered showers are predicted. Tonight through Sunday, scattered showers are forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Sunday, mostly overcast skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be 5-7+ miles except during times of showers. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 50???€?s to lows in the 40???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday, the winds are expected to be from the west at 5-10 knots with gusts to 15 knots. Seas 5 feet diminishing to 2-4 feet by the afternoon hours. Partly cloudy skies. Isolated showers. Tuesday, SE winds at 10 knots are predicted to increase to 20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 4 feet increasing to 5 feet by the afternoon hours. Partly cloudy skies becoming overcast by the afternoon hours. Dry weather diminishing to evening rain. Wednesday, S-SE wind at 25 knots are forecast. Seas 6-8 feet. Overcast skies. Rain. [SEP] The stern of the Captain Jack, a 105' charter vessel, grounded against a shallow rock as the tidal current swung the vessel around after anchoring. The grounding occurred at 10:20 a.m. on June 9. The vessel had 2500 gallons of diesel; however, none of the fuel tanks were compromised during the grounding. MSO Juneau reported that the location was at 55?? 53.1'W and 133??42.6'W, which is just off the southern tip of Kosckusko Island, NW of the much larger Prince of Wales Island. There was concern that the vessel might sink in the shallow water, however, dewatering pumps were able to keep up with the vessel flooding. The owner hired a salvor who was due on scene at 1615 on June 9. Simultaneously, the SEAPRO response barge was enroute from Ketchikan. [SEP] CAPTAIN JACK YACHT GROUNDING, SUMNER STRAIT, ALASKA 0640 ADT, Thursday June 10, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (06/10): 2139 Sunrise (06/11):0410 Sunset (06/11): 2140 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 15-20 knots. Tonight, SW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Friday, SE winds at 15 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NE at 30 knots by the evening hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through tonight, the seas are expected to be 4 feet. Friday, 4 foot seas are predicted to increase to 6 feet by the evening hours. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, isolated showers are forecast. Tonight, scattered showers are expected. Friday, chance of morning showers are predicted to increase to rain by the evening hours. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies are forecast to diminish to mostly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Tonight through Friday, overcast skies are expected. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 50???€?s to lows in the 40???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 25 knots. Seas 5 feet. Overcast skies. Rain. Sunday through Monday, SE winds at 20 knots are predicted. Seas 5 feet. Overcast skies. Rain. [SEP] 11JUN04/1300: P/C CAPTAIN JACK CURRENTLY AGROUND ON ROCKS IN VICINITY OF COSMOS PASS, SOUTH OF EDNA BAY. MSD KETCHIKAN FOSC REPRESENTATIVE CONDUCTED OVERFLIGHT OF GROUNDED P/C CAPTAIN JACK. VESSEL AGROUND/STABLE AT LAST REPORTED POSITION WITH NO MOVEMENT NOTED. RESIDUAL SHEENING NOTED AROUND GROUNDED VESSEL. NO HEAVY CONCENTRATIONS OF RECOVERABLE OIL NOTED. COMMERCIAL SALVAGE CO/CLEANUP CONTRACTOR, ALASKA COMMERCIAL DIVERS (ACD) REPORTED ALL RECOVERABLE OIL REMOVED FROM VESSEL. APPROXIMATELY 2200 GALS OF OIL RECOVERED UTILIZING TANK TRUCK ON LANDING CRAFT. MSD KETCHIKAN FOSC REP NOTED CONTAINMENT BOOM AROUND VESSEL INEFFECTIVE DUE TO WIND AND WAVE ACTION. CONTAINMENT BOOM REMOVED. MSD KETCHIKAN TO CONDUCT FOLLOW UP OVERFLIGHT OF VESSEL TO MONITOR STATUS, PROBABLY NEXT MONDAY, JUNE 14. [SEP] COMMERCIAL SALVAGE CO/CLEANUP CONTRACTOR, ALASKA COMMERCIAL DIVERS, completed removal of all the diesel fuel and other hazardous materials with the exception of the vessel batteries. It was judged as too dangerous to remove them. Coast Guard overflight on June 14 revealed a very light, small sheen around the vessel, but it was judged that the substantial pollution threat had been removed. Also, the CG judged that the burnt-out hull was not a hazard to navigation, and the case was closed. [SEP] To: NOAA SSC John Whitney FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded Yacht, SE Alaska FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Debra Simecek-Beatty, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of the diesel that may be released from a grounded yacht. These notes are based on the following information: On June 9, 2004, a yacht ran aground at 55?? 53.1???€?N, 133?? 42.6???€?W?? (southern tip of Kosciusko Island). The vessel is carrying approximately 2,500 gallons of diesel. At this time, the vessel is not leaking product. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) TRAJECTORY Today, the winds are expected to be from the W at 15-20 knots. Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 10-15 knots. Thursday, the winds are predicted to be from the W at 10-15 knots becoming SW at 10-15 knots in the afternoon hours. The NOS tidal predictions for this area indicate the maximum flood is about 1 knot and the maximum ebb, near 2 knots. Given the forecast winds, the tide will probably dominate the movement of the diesel. If a catastrophic release of 2,500 gallons were to occur on a flood tide (unlikely since the grounded vessel is not leaking product), the slick would move to the northwest through Cosmos Pass and into Davidson Inlet (about 4 miles) immediately threatening the small islands east of the grounding. A release on an ebb tide would move a slick to the southwest and into the western side of Iphigenia Bay (about 4 miles southeast of Warren Island). Any remaining oil would move northerly on the flood tide and, with the forecast westerly winds, likely threaten the northern tip of Heceta Island and the Davidson Inlet area. 2) Oil Weathering Diesel Oil Diesel products used in recreational vessels typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. With the wind speeds greater than 10 knots and mixing due to strong tides, we would anticipate that 90% of the diesel would evaporate and disperse in the first 12 hours of a catastrophic release. [SEP] CAPTAIN JACK GROUNDING, KOSCIUSKO ISLAND, ALASKA 1330 ADT, Wednesday June 9, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (06/9):2140 Sunrise (06/10):0400 Sunset (06/10):2141 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the W at 15-20 knots. Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 10-15 knots. Thursday, the winds are predicted to be from the W at 10-15 knots becoming SW at 10-15 knots in the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Thursday, the seas are expected to 3-4 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Thursday, isolated showers are predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Thursday, cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the mid 50???€?s to lows in the mid 40???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday through Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the E-SE at 25-30 knots. Seas 4-6 feet. Friday, mostly
A double hull barge carrying 7,200 barrels of 30% concentration of sulfuric acid oleum grounded at 29 deg 57.5'N, 93 deg 51.5'W (200 yards north of buoy 64, west side of the channel Sabine Lake). The barge was refloated during the night of May 26. The barge was transferred to the Bean Fleet pier to allow inspectors to check the condition of the barge and cargo. On May 27, there were no problems noted and it was expected that the barge would continue on its voyage. [SEP] OLEUM BARGE GROUNDING, PORT ARTHUR, TEXAS 0915 CDT, Wednesday May 26, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (05/26): 2009 Sunrise (05/27):0616 Sunset (05/27): 2010 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be light and variable shifting to be from the south at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, south winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Thursday, light and variable winds are forecast to shift and be from the south at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Thursday, the seas in the northern region of Lake Sabine are expected to be choppy to rough. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Thursday, no precipitation is predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Thursday, mostly clear to partly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 90???€?s to lows in the 70???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday through Saturday, early morning light and variable winds are expected to shift and be from the south at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas rough. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Sunday, early morning light and variable winds are predicted to shift and be from the south at 20 knots. Seas rough. Partly cloudy skies. Possible morning showers and thunderstorms. _____________________________________ Hydrology Forecast: Neches River (Beaumont): Flood Stage: 4 feet Current CFS: 16,000 Date: 5/26 5/27 5/28 5/29 5/30 Gauge Ht (Feet) 2.9 2.85 2.7 2.2 2.0 Sabine River (Deweyville): Flood Stage: 24 feet Current CFS: 9700 Date: 5/26 5/27 5/28 5/29 5/30 Gauge Ht (Feet) 22.65 21.5 20.7 20.7 20.7 [SEP] Resources at Risk for Sulfuric Acid Barge in Port Arthur, TX I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on 26 May 2004. Information in this report is based on the assumption that a double-hulled barge with 7,200 bbls of Oleum (sulfuric acid/sulfur trioxide) grounded near Port Arthur Texas at Buoy 69 (29&#8734; 58.7???€? N, 93&#8734;50.5???€?). II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report is Sabine Lake and the surrounding area in the vicinity of Port Arthur, Texas. This report does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for spill location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material Sulfuric acid/sulfur hydroxide is a strong acid that is heavier than water, very soluble, and is expected to have an energetic reaction when mixed with water. Where addition of acid changes the pH significantly, water-column and benthic organisms will be impacted. A pH value around 4.5 represents the approximate thresholds beyond which most life processes in natural waters are seriously impaired (Strumm and Morgan 1996). Rounding to the nearest whole pH unit, if added acid lowers pH to less than about 5, aquatic organisms will be impacted. The duration of exposure for this pH-related impact is on the scale of minutes to hours because the physiological functions of aquatic organisms depend so highly on charge balances in membranes and cells. A pH limit of 5 is close to results from bioassays in fresh water. Another risk of any release of oleum is mobilization of contaminants such as heavy metals from sediments where the concentrated plume comes in contact with bottom sediments. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline along Port Arthur is predominantly solid man-made structures and riprap. The Humble Island shoreline is predominantly composed of scarps and steep slopes in clay along the Neches River and salt/brackish marsh along Old River Cove. The Lower Neches Wildlife Refuge is almost exclusively marsh with some small coarse-grained sand and shell beaches. Sydney Island and Stewts Island shorelines are mostly mixed sand and shell beaches with areas of marsh (Stewts Island) and scarps and steep slopes in clay (Sydney Island). Large bayous surround Sabine Lake within 5 miles of the release site. Because the oleum is expected to sink, intertidal habitats are likely to be exposed to diluted concentrations. Little is known about pH impacts to salt marsh vegetation. In areas of very low pH, it is likely that above-ground vegetation could be affected, as well as the biota who live there. V. Biological Resources at Risk Fish and Invertebrates Species of commercial and recreational interest potentially present in Sabine Lake include: hardhead catfish (spawning), spotted seatrout (spawning/larvae and juveniles present) pinfish (spawing/larvae and juveniles), red drum, striped mullet, Atlantic croaker (juveniles), bay anchovy (spawning/larvae juveniles), gulf menhaden, southern flounder, brown shrimp (larvae/juveniles), blue crab (spawning/larvae and juveniles), and white shrimp (spawning/larvae and juveniles). American oyster are present in western portions of Sabine Lake (spawning/larvae and juveniles). Similar species of fish and invertebrates are present in surrounding rivers and bayous. High concentrations of red drum occur in the Lower Neches Wildlife Management Area (WMA). High concentrations of white shrimp (larvae/juveniles) occur near Blue Buck Pt. Essentially, there are lots of species present, and many sensitive early life stages present. Larvae and juveniles are less likely to avoid areas of low pH. Thus, impacts to both water-column and benthic fish and invertebrates may be severe where the pH exceeds 5. Birds A black skimmer colony (100 nests) occurs on Sydney Island. Skimmers may also be nesting on Stewts Island, and American white pelicans and rails may be present. Wading birds and rails are present in the Lower Neches WMA, Sabine National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) and other bayous and wetlands surrounding the lake. Diving birds may be present in open water. Impacts to birds may result from feeding on fish killed or incapacitated by exposure to low pH water, such as burning and irritation of tissues that come in contact with acid on the fish. Reptiles and Small Mammals Texas diamondback terrapins (candidate species for federal listing) may be present in shallow, open water, and alligators are present in bayous and wetlands. River otters are present in the Lower Neches WMA. Human-Use Resources A Gulf States Utilities Co. water intake occurs in Old River Cove, very close to the release site. Three water intakes occur along the Neches River (Texaco Chemical Co., Star Enterprise, and FINA Oil & Chemical Company). Three water intakes are present behind Pleasure Island along the Port Arthur Ship Channel. (Star Enterprise, Rice-Carden Corp., and Chevron U.S.A. Inc.). Boat ramps are present throughout the area. The Lower Neches WMA and Sabine NWR are adjacent to Sabine Lake. [SEP] Final Report: MSO Port Arthur reported that the grounded barge was refloated during the night of May 26. The barge was transferred to the Bean Fleet pier to allow inspectors to check the condition of the barge and cargo. By this morning, May 27, there were no problems noted and it was expected that the barge will continue on its voyage. No additional NOAA response support is expected. [SEP] Date: May 26, 2004 0930 PDT To: NOAA SSC Richard Wingrove FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Oleum Barge Grounding FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Debra Simecek-Beatty, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications for a potential oleum release. These notes are based on the following information: A double hull barge carrying 7,200 barrels of 30% concentration of sulfuric acid oleum grounded at 29?? 57.5???€?N, 93?? 51.5???€?W (200 yards north of buoy 64, west side of the channel Sabine Lake). Observers report the vessel is not leaking. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast: Today, the winds are expected to be light and variable shifting to be from the south at 15 20 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, south winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Thursday, light and variable winds are forecast to shift and be from the south at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. 2) Chemical and Trajectory Analysis The oleum product is a 30% concentration of sulfur trioxide in sulfuric acid. A release below the vessel waterline would result in a vigorous oleum water (hydrolysis) reaction. Sulfur trioxide gases may be generated around the area where the reaction is occurring resulting in white fuming acid vapors. PEOPLE WORKING IN THIS AREA SHOULD BE AWARE OF A POTENTIAL AIR HAZARD. The reaction converts sulfur trioxide to sulfuric acid. Since the sulfuric acid is much heavier than water, it will sink and the hydrolysis reaction will mix the acid into the water column.
EPA Region 10 called to notify NOAA of a mystery slick on Lake Washington near Kirkland Harbor. No support was requested.
oiled birds; mystery slick; Verbal
The Alaska State Ferry, M/V LaConte, grounded in clear and calm weather on Cozian Reef at the north end of Peril Strait on Admiralty Island in SE Alaska on May 11, 2004. The vessel was hard aground and suffered significant damage, including multiple stress fractures. However, no oil (deisel) was released. Nevertheless, boom was deployed around the vessel and lightering commenced up to 3000 gallons remaining onboard as an operational supply. A substantial amount of response equipment was on-scene and a salvage barge was en route from Seattle. Potential harbors of refuge were evaluated in the vicinity of Cozian Reef. Arrangements were made for bird hazing in the event of an oil release impacting nearby tidal flats. Resource experts from both NOAA Fisheries and the US Fish and Wildlife Servcie were consulted and assisted in assessment of resources at risk. The LaConte was stabilized and anchored at Cozian Reef for the lightering and for temporary patches to the hull prior to towing the vessel to Ketchikan for permanent repairs in their drydock facility. The ferry was refloated and moved off the reef on May 17, and after confirming that the temporary patches were adequate, the vessel was towed to Ketchikan for repairs. [SEP] Trajectory for intended time of lightering, 1330 on May 12. [SEP] The vessel remains hard aground. A more extensive survey today revealed significant damage, including multiple stress fractures. No oil has been released. Boom has been deployed around the vessel and lightering is scheduled starting at 1330 tomorrow. Current plans are to lighter 17,000 gallons of the diesel and leave the remainder onboard as an operational supply. There is a substantial amount of response equipment on-scene and a salvage barge en route from Seattle is expected to arrive on Friday. Potential harbors of refuge are being considered. Arrangements have been made for bird hazing in the event of an oil release impacting nearby tidal flats. Resource experts from both NOAA Fisheries and the US Fish and Wildlife Service have been consulted and are assisting with assessment of resources at risk. Investigation into the cause of the accident is ongoing. [SEP] The ferry LeConte was refloated and moved off the reef yesterday. After confirming that temporary patches were adequate, the vessel was towed to Ketchikan, where it will be repaired. No oil was released to the environment during this incident. [SEP] Lightering operations were completed today. The vessel has been stablized and anchored and temporary repairs must be made before it can be removed from the reef. The U.S. Coast Guard has approved a preliminary salvage plan. The American Salvor is expected to arrive on-scene (from Seattle) by noon tomorrow. Removal of the ferry is not anticipated before next Tuesday. All vehicles were also removed from the ferry today. Pollution mitigation personnel are demobilizing. Unless the situation changes, the next Hotline update will be on Monday May 17. [SEP] Date: 1700 ADT May 10, 2004 To: NOAA SSC John Whitney FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded State Ferry, Peril Strait, AK FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a potential diesel spill from a grounded state ferry. These notes are based on the following information: The Alaska State Ferry Lacante grounded on Cozian Reef in Peril Straits, Alaska at approx. 1000 today (May 10, 2004). The ferry grounded at 57deg 34min N, 135deg 26min W, and is reported to be carrying 30,000 gallons of diesel. The ferry is reported NOT leaking at this time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds this evening are forecast to be from the NW at 10 knots, changing to be from the SE at 10 knots after midnight due to land breeze. On Tuesday the winds are predicted to be from the NW at 10 knots during the heat of the day (noon to 1800 hours). 2) TRAJECTORY Because the ferry has not yet leaked oil, we examined four cases: flood vs ebb tides with landbreeze vs seabreeze conditions Flood Tide Scenario: For seabreeze (NW) winds we would expect the diesel could contact from Cozian Reef west to include Otstoia Island, Elovoi Island Krugloi Island and the Duffield Peninsula as far west as Favorite Anchorage. For landbreeze (SE) winds we would expect the diesel could contact Ford Rock, and the southeastern shore of Emmons Island and Chichagof Island between Ushk Point and Rodgers Point, with some oil possibly moving between Emmons Island and Chichagof Island. Ebb Tide Scenario: For seabreeze (NW) winds we would expect the diesel could contact the shoreline of the Duffield Peninsula from Peschani Point west to Favorite Anchorage including nearby reefs and islands. For landbreeze (SE) winds we would expect the diesel to stay offshore with a sheen exending 6-7 nm in the SE direction in Hoohah Sound. 3) TABLE OF FLOOD/EBB TIMES Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 05/10/2004 00:10 +0.0 Min Before Flood Mon 03:20 +1.5 Max Flood 05:57 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 09:43 -2.1 Max Ebb 12:49 +0.0 Min Before Flood 16:12 +1.8 Max Flood 19:10 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 22:55 -1.3 Max Ebb ------------------------------------------------------- 05/11/2004 01:31 +0.0 Min Before Flood Tue 04:37 +1.3 Max Flood 07:04 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 11:11 -1.7 Max Ebb 14:05 +0.0 Min Before Flood 17:29 +1.7 Max Flood 20:25 +0.0 Min Before Ebb 4) OIL FATE Diesel Lighter refined products, such as diesel, typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring (in the case of diesel) is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. Therefore these oils may not present an involved cleanup problem, however they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat problem in low energy marine environments. Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (ALASKA) API = 38.8 Pour Point = -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 40 deg F Time of Initial Release = May 10, 1700 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 30,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 30,000 - 4 - 0 - 96 2 30,000 8 1 91 4 30,000 - 19 - 4 - 77 6 30,000 27 11 61 8 30,000 - 33 - 21 - 46 10 30,000 37 30 34 12 30,000 - 39 - 37 - 24 14 30,000 41 42 17 16 30,000 - 41 - 46 - 12 18 30,000 42 49 9 [SEP] Lightering operations began at approximately 1500 yesterday and progressed slowly. Lightering will continue today. Continuing assessments of the vessel indicate substantial damage. Salvage operations are not expected before next Tuesday. A conference call was conducted yesterday among trustee agencies and other responders to evaluate and rank potential harbors of refuge. [SEP] At approximately 10am, Monday 5/10, the ferry vessel LaConte ran aground in the inside passage in Peril Strait, north of Sitka, AK. The vessel is hard aground on a rocky bottom. The vessel has 30K gallons of diesel fuel onboard but no oil has been released. Damage is to sewage and ballast tanks only. There were some injuries to passengers reported. All passengers have been taken off the ferry by vessels in the area. Due to the extent of the damage and the nature of the grounding the vessel was not taken off the rocks at the succeeding high tide. A diver survey is being conducted and plans are being developed to ensure the vessel's stability prior to any re-floating attempts. Completion of the vessel salvage may take several days. The salvage operation plan includes bringing a lightering barge alongside the LaConte. Off-loading the fuel oil from the LeConte will significantly reduce the threat of pollution. NOAA HAZMAT Alaska SSC John Whitney provided initial phone support to the USCG FOSC. Additionally NOAA HAZMAT provided trajectory information, based on a number of possible scenarios, and a weather forecast. Additional follow up and support will be provided as needed until the the threat of pollution is eliminated and the
MSO San Francisco received a report of an unknown amount of diesel fuel released from a broken 14-inch subterranean pipeline in the vicinity of Suisun Slough, Solano County, CA.  MSO personnel responded and observed oil seeping into the Suisun Marsh. [SEP] Digital images of marshes in vicinity of Suisan Slough taken late on Wednesday. [SEP] April 30, 2004 Evening Report: Suisun Slough Pipeline Spill The NOAA SSC, John Whitney, and a Seattle biological scientist, Amy Merten, reported to the Suisun Slough Duck Hunter???€?s Command Post early Friday morning, Apr 30. The response team including MSO San Francisco with FOSC CDR Williams; the California Fish and Game (OSPR Group); the RP, Kinder Morgan who was supported by several consultants including MSRC; and the USCG Pacific Strike Team. After orientation and discussion with onscene personnel, it was realized that the affected area is less than one-half square mile with the heavily impacted area less than 20 acres (Zone A). In addition it was evident that the size of the spill was less than 1 million gallons, an early figure that was floated. The NOAA Team immediately began pursuing two goals: 1) an overflight of the entire area, and 2) organization of multi-agency SCAT teams. The NOAA SSC joined an RP rep, who had flown the spill sight the day before, for an overflight. Only oil sheening was observed in some of the inner sloughs. Four SCAT teams covered the areas where oil had been identified or expected. In Zone A, actual pooled oil was detected by the ground SCAT, in small pools which weren???€?t sheening due to lack of water in the marsh. In other zones, small pools of product were also identified. The goal for tomorrow is to work with operations to successfully remove the oil from the marsh without doing more harm than good. [SEP] SUISUN SLOUGH DIESEL SPILL, NORTH OF GRIZZLY BAY, CALIFORNIA 0630 PDT, Wednesday May 5, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (05/05): 1949 Sunrise (05/06):0620 Sunset (05/06): 1950 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 10 knots. Tonight, S-SE winds at 5-10 knots are predicted. Thursday, S-SE winds at 5-10 knots are forecast to shift and be from the south at 5-10 knots by the late morning hours. _____________________________________ Waves (In the Marsh): Today through Thursday, smooth to slight choppy seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Thursday, no precipitation is predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through tonight, clear skies are forecast. Thursday, mostly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 70???€?s to lows in the 50???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are expected to be from the south at 5-10 knots increasing to 15 knots by the afternoon hours. Marsh seas less than 1 foot. Mostly cloudy skies. Chance of rain. Saturday through Sunday, SW winds at 5-15 knots are predicted. Marsh seas less than 1 foot. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. [SEP] SUISAN SLOUGH DIESEL SPILL, NORTH OF GRIZZLY BAY, CALIFORNIA 0740 PDT, Monday May 3, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (05/03): 1948 Sunrise (05/04):0622 Sunset (05/04): 1948 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be light and variable shifting to be from the west at less than 10 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, NW winds at 15 knots are predicted. Tuesday, NW winds at 5-10 knots are forecast to shift and be from the W-NW at 15 knots by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Waves (In the Marsh): Today through Tuesday, smooth to light choppy seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tuesday, no precipitation is predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tuesday, clear skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 50???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the W-NW at 5-10 knots increasing to 15 knots or less by the afternoon hours. Smooth to light choppy marsh seas. Clears skies. Dry. Thursday, SW winds at 5-10 knots are predicted to increase to 15 knots or less by the afternoon hours. Smooth to light choppy marsh seas. Clears skies becoming high clouds by the evening hours. Dry. Friday, south winds at 10-15 knots. Smooth to light choppy marsh seas. Low clouds. Chance of scattered light showers. [SEP] SUISAN SLOUGH DIESEL SPILL, NORTH OF GRIZZLY BAY, CALIFORNIA Special Extended forecast 1030 PDT, Saturday May 1, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunrise (05/01):0624 Sunset (05/01): 1947 Sunrise (5/02) : 0623 Sunset (5/02): 1948 _____________________________________ Winds: Today (Saturday) thru Tuesday (5/4) very little change is expected. Morning winds from the SW at 10 -15 knots followed by increasing afternoon winds 15 - 20 knots from the SW with gusts to 25 knots. On Tuesday night winds are expected to increase to 20 -25 knots from the SW. On Wednesday (5/5) 20 - 25 knots winds from the SW are expected. _____________________________________ Waves (In the Marsh): Today through Tuesday, smooth to light choppy seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: It is the beginning of the dry season and no precipitation is expected for at least the next 10 days. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, clear skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. On Tuesday night - Wednesday the ceiling is expected to be down to 1000 - 1500 feet. _____________________________________ Temperatures: From Saturday thru Monday highs are expected to be in the high 80's to low 90's. Lows are expected to be in the upper 40's to low 50's. On Tuesday and Wednesday the highs are expected to be in the high 70's. [SEP] SUISAN SLOUGH DIESEL SPILL, NORTH OF GRIZZLY BAY, CALIFORNIA 0730 PDT, Friday April 30, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (04/30): 1946 Sunrise (05/01):0624 Sunset (05/01): 1947 Current Observation (Fairfield): winds from the SW at 14 knots. _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 10-15 knots increasing to 15- 20 knots with gusts to 25 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, SW winds at 10- 15 knots are predicted to decrease to 5-10 knots by the late evening hours. Saturday, SW winds at 5-10 knots are forecast to increase to 15-20 knots with gusts to 25 knots by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Waves (In the Marsh): Today through Saturday, smooth to light choppy seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Saturday, no precipitation is predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, clear skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 50???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday through Monday, the winds are expected to be W-SW at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the W-SW at 10-15 knots with gusts to 20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas in the marsh are expected to be smooth to light chop. Clear skies. Dry. Tuesday, W-SW winds at 20-25 knots are predicted. Seas in the marsh are forecast to be light chop to choppy. Possible evening low clouds and fog. Dry. [SEP] Digital images of marshes in vicinity of Suisan Slough taken late on Wednesday. [SEP] Digital images of marshes in vicinity of Suisan Slough taken late on Wednesday. [SEP] Digital images of marshes in vicinity of Suisan Slough taken late on Wednesday. [SEP] Attached is a compilation of coordinated shoreline assessment activities as of May 03, 2004. The map was developed by CA Fish and Game Office of Spill Prevention and Response. SCAT teams were comprised of representatives from Kinder-Morgan, USCG, NOAA, and CA Fish and Game. [SEP] Digital images from the field. [SEP] Digital images of marshes in vicinity of Suisan Slough taken late on Wednesday.
On Wednesday, 28 April 2004, NOAA was notified of a hydrogen sulfide release from a barge located in a fleeting area near Baton Rouge, Louisiana. At that time, the identified problem, i.e., the failure of two gaskets, was repaired and no subsequent emissions were observed. During assessment activities, it was discovered that the product was "off-spec" and the barge was not certified for such a product. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) worked with USCG Marine Safety Unit Baton Rouge to address concerns related to the stability of the barge product and plans to off-load the product to prevent subsequent releases that might threaten local communities. Off-loading of the cargo began at approximately 0914 hrs on 10 June after several small delays during final configuration of the modified scrubber. The NOAA SSC was on-scene to assist the USCG in operational oversight and air monitoring coordination. [SEP] SODIUM HYDRO-SULFIDE SPILL, PORT ALLEN, LOUISIANA 1230 CDT, Friday May 7, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (05/07):1947 Sunrise (05/08):0615 Sunset (05/08):1948 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 10 knots. Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 10 knots, diminishing around midnight to be light and variable. Saturday, the light and variable winds are expected to continue until midmorning when the winds are predicted to be from the S at 10 knots. _____________________________________ Waves (In the Mississippi River): Today through Saturday, smooth seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Saturday, no precipitation is predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, mostly clear skies are forecast. Tonight, patchy fog is predicted. Saturday, mostly clear skies are expected. Visibility is forecast to be unrestricted except during times or fog. _____________________________________ Inversion Height: Today, the inversion height is expected to be 1400-2000 feet. Tonight, possible low inversion height with fog is predicted. Saturday, an inversion height of 1400-2000 feet is forecast. _____________________________________ Stability Class: Today through Saturday, stable air is expected. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the upper 80???€?s to lows in the low 60???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be light and variable at 5 knots or less. Seas smooth. Stable air. Mostly clear skies with patchy evening fog. No precipitation is expected. Monday, the winds are forecast to be from the S-SE at 10 knots. Seas smooth. Stable air. Mostly clear skies with patchy evening fog. No precipitation is expected. [SEP] The NOAA Scientific Support Team was notified today that the RP wished to change their design for the scrubbers on board FT-22. The hopes were to go from 3 individual scrubbers to one, larger scrubber. The Coast Guard's concerns were with the PVC and PVC cement the RP wished to use on the design, and if the amount of Calcium Hypochlorite that was to be used was adequate. The USCG received the following report: During the 05/17/2004 Barge FT-22 briefing the USCG Baton Rouge MSU recommended the use of a vapor scrubber system as a secondary containment measure to remove any H2S emitted from the barge. The RP suggested the use of a two-stage vapor scrubber system. LSU was asked to furnish the calculations for determining the amount of calcium hypochlorite required to effectively remove any H2S vapors from the barge. Volume figures from the USCG estimated the total volume of the three (3) tanks to be 60,600 cubic feet with a total headspace of 46,700 cubic feet (77%). It should be noted the RP estimated the total volume and headspace to be 141,000 and 94,000 cubic feet, respectively. All calculations are based on the volumes received from the USCG on a daily basis. A temperature increase from 75 F to 110 F would emit approx. 3070 cubic feet or 86 cubic meters. At a H2S conc. of 2800 mg/m3 (2000ppm), approx. 244,000 mg of H2S would be released through the scrubber system. Calcium hypochlorite reacts with H2S at a rate of 2.1 to 1, requiring 512,000 mg of Ca(OCl)2 to neutralize 244,000 mg H2S. Using tablets at 64% total Ca(OCl)2 , approx. 1.8 lbs. of tablets should be used per day. It should be noted the large tablets typically need to be submerged in flowing water for them to adequately dissolve. It may be beneficial to use a combination of granulated and small tablet Ca(OCl)2, instead of the larger tablets. Compatibility charts have shown that H2S and PVC piping are compatible. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information regarding a sodium hydrosulfide barge incident in Baton Rouge, LA. [SEP] SODIUM HYDRO-SULFIDE SPILL, PORT ALLEN, LOUISIANA 1130 CDT, Friday May 14, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (05/14):1952 Sunrise (05/15):0611 Sunset (05/15):1952 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the E to SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday, the winds are predicted to be from the SE at 5-10 knots. _____________________________________ Waves (In the Mississippi River): Today through Saturday, smooth seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, 70% chance of showers and thunderstorms with locally heavy rainfall possible. Tonight, scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected. Saturday, showers and thunderstorms with locally heavy rainfall is forecast in the region. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, mostly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is forecast to be 10 miles except during showers. _____________________________________ Stability Class: Today through Saturday, unstable air is expected. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the low 80???€?s to lows in the upper 60???€?s. _____________________________________ Hydrology: A flood watch is in affect for the local area. The Mississippi River height at Baton Rogue is expected to trend downward for the next five days. FLD STG 24-HR FORECAST 7AM LOWER MISSISSIPPI RIVER LOCATION STG TDA CHG FRI SAT SUN MON BATON ROUGE 35 26.9 -0.1 27.0 26.8 26.3 25.9 _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Seas smooth. Partly cloudy skies. Isolated showers and thunderstorms are predicted. Monday, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Seas smooth. Partly cloudy skies. Isolated showers and thunderstorms are predicted. [SEP] It would seem that the current plan is to send the barge back to the facility in Texas where the problem started via the ICW. A dedicated tow should leave from Plaquemine Point Shipyard on Sunday evening. The NOAA SSC has relocated to Houston, Texas to begin preparations with the USCG MSO Houston. Additional details to follow. [SEP] SODIUM HYDRO-SULFIDE BARGE, GALENA PARK, TEXAS 0900 CDT, Thursday June 10, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (06/10): 2021 Sunrise (06/11):0620 Sunset (06/11): 2022 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the S-SE at 10-12 knots. Tonight, S-SE winds at 6-8 knots are predicted. Friday, S-SE winds at 10-12 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, scattered showers and thunderstorms are expected. Tonight, scattered showers and thunderstorms are predicted to diminish after sunset. Friday, scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, partly cloudy skies are expected. _____________________________________ Inversion Height: Today, the inversion height is predicted to be 2000 feet increasing to 3800-4000 feet by the afternoon hours. Tonight, the inversion height is forecast to be 1100 feet. Friday, an inversion height of 1100 feet is expected to increase to 4200 feet by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Stability Class: Today through Friday, well mixed air is expected. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 70???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday through Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the S-SE at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the south at 5-10 knots by the evening hours. Partly cloudy skies. Scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] The FT-22 is still alongside in Baton Rouge, LA. An update on the current situation: As it stands the barge is to be transported downstream to Stolthaven in New Orleans to be offloaded and piped directly into railroad cars. They are looking for rail cars that can handle the product which will then be transported to Pasadena, TX. The SSC will continue communicating with MSU Baton Rouge on this issue until it is resolved. [SEP] NASH Barge Incident, Baton Rouge, LA SSC Evening Report 05/14/2004 Situation Plans to leave the products on the barge and send it to Arkansaw City were presented to the FOSC this morning. On hand were the CO for MSU Baton Rouge, the NOAA SSC and assistant SSC, Dr Ed Overton, and CDR Rawson, Chief of Inspections MSO New Orleans. The plan as presented was to engineer additional safeguards for the barge to compensate for the fact that it does not meet all the requirements for a vessel
On the evening of April 26, 2004 the NOAA Scientific Support, Gulf Region wasnotified of a mystery pipeline spill in a marsh area near Potash, LA, west ofPort Sulfur, LA.  The NOAA Gulf Region Scientific Support Office was contactedand given five locations where there was an estimated 50 bbls of crude oil(total). A resources at risk analysis was provided. NOAA SSC conducted site visit and provided a clean-up assessment to the USCG. [SEP] PIPELINE SPILL, POTASH, LOUISIANA 1200 CDT, Wednesday April 28, 2004 Sunset (04/28): 1933 Sunrise (04/29):0619 Sunset (04/29): 1933 Current Observation (Grand Isle): winds from the E-SE at 15 knots. _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the east at 15 knots gusting to 18 knots shifting to be from the SE at 15 knots gusting to 18 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, SE winds at 15 knots gusting to 20 knots are predicted. Thursday, SE winds at 15-20 knots with higher gusts are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through tonight, dry weather is expected. Thursday, afternoon and evening showers and thunderstorms are predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, mostly clear skies are forecast. Tonight, partly cloudy skies are expected. Thursday, overcast skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be 7+ miles except during times or showers. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 70???€?s to lows in the 60???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 20 knots. Mostly cloudy to cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Saturday, south winds at 15 knots are predicted. Mostly cloudy to cloudy skies. Isolated showers increasing to scattered showers by the afternoon hours. [SEP] 0139. Oiled marsh. The exposed marsh grass is shown with a 12 to 15 inch band of heavy oil residue. Some free-floating oil is also shown in the photograph. [SEP] 0137. Small glass sampling tube with 11 cm of oiled sediment. What appears as oil saturated sediment can be seen in the tube. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about a mystery pipeline spill in a marsh near Potash, LA. [SEP] Resources at Risk, Potash Mystery Spill This report was prepared on 27 April 2004. Information in this report is based on the assumption that a pipeline release of approximately 50 bbls occurred near the Mississippi River between Port Sulphur and Potash (29 28???€? 20???€?-50???€?N, 089 42???€?4???€?-40???€?W). This report does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for spill location information. Habitats Habitats in this area are predominantly salt and brackish marsh. Birds A rare raptor may be nesting along the river in the area. Colonial waterbirds may be nesting in salt marshes and bays near the river, but are not likely to be affected by a small spill in the mainstem river, as most nests are 8 or more miles from the estimated release site. Some holdover wintering waterfowl may be utilizing adjacent bays and wetlands, but most birds have departed by this time of year. Use of the river by waterfowl is less common than use of open water in bays. Fish and Invertebrates Several commercial and recreational fish may be present in the river, including freshwater (e.g. sunfish, crappie, carp, bass, perch, gar) and saltwater (e.g. croaker, drum, jack, sturgeon, flounder, spot, seatrout, tarpon) species. Atlantic croaker and bay anchovy may be highly abundant, and sensitive life stages (spawning, eggs, larvae) may occur at this time for both freshwater and saltwater species. Higher concentrations of sensitive life stages are expected in shallow water in sheltered nearshore areas. Gulf sturgeon (federally threatened) are present in the area. Oyster lease sites occur in adjacent bays. White river crawfish, river shrimp, brown shrimp, pink shrimp, white shrimp, and blue crab are present in the river at low to moderate abundances. Reptiles and Aquatic Mammals Juvenile and adult alligators and several species of aquatic furbearers (e.g. river otter, muskrat, mink, nutria, raccoon) are present in marshes and along the river. [SEP] Follow-up investigations by the USCG and pressure checks on three flow lines in the Potash Oil Field have resulted in identifying the source. It was one of the three lines. On Wednesday, 5 May 2004, the Assistant SSC participated with the NRDA trustees on a site visit to the spill site. Cleanup continues, but the primary efforts are only the maintenance of deployed sorbent materials for passive recovery. [SEP] 0133. Core sample collected. The picture shows a 4 inch core tube partially filled with sediment. [SEP] On 29 April 2004, the NOAA SSC participated in a field trip to the Potash Oil Spill site with the USCG. The purpose of the site visit was to assess the cleanup operations, roughly delineate the spill impact area, and further investigate possible sources of oil pollution. One previous observation of great interest during the site visit was a report of subsurface oil that could be liberated by disturbing the sediment with a pole. At present, there is no identified RP and all cleanup is under USCG direction. Additional Background Information The USCG was notified of the incident on 17 April. The current operator of the old Potash Oil Field stated that the oil was not from any of their operations, but they had originally initiated cleanup. Since there was no clear source identified, the USCG assumed the cleanup effort and began a through investigation to include securing samples of possible sources for detailed oil fingerprinting. At the time of the site visit, 12 days later, cleanup operations had shifted into the maintenance stage. Sorbent booms remain in most of the canals to recover oil liberated from the marsh during tidal exchanges. Site Visit Observations The first location investigated was near position 29?? 28???€? 37.4???€? N Lat. 089?? 42???€? 11.9???€? W Long. This is one of two sites where disturbing the subsurface sediments would liberate sheen and small droplet???€?s of black oil. The source of this pollution is unknown. Possible theories include a leaking subsurface pipeline or oil that may have become entrained in small burrows during a low tide. Probing with a small glass tube was used to investigate this observation, which was first observed by noticing oil surfacing after the airboat passed over the area. A core sample was also collected. During the site visit, many flow-lines were observed laid directly across the marsh and alongside canals. It is not known if there are any buried lines in the area. The marsh in this area shows evidence of residual oil contamination as a heavy band along the marsh edge. Vertically, the oil band measures from the sediment surface to approximately 12 to 15 inches on the vegetative stems and leaves. Oil contamination within the site is variable. Some areas are heavily oiled, whiles others are only lightly impacted by films and sheens. SAV is also present within the site. The extent of exposure to SAV is unknown. The site visit was just past low tide, and most of the SAV was not exposed. At one location, sheens were observed in the same area as SAV, but visible oiling, i.e., sorbed black oil, was not observed. A second site where subsurface oil was reported is located near position 29?? 28???€? 37.9???€? N Lat. 089?? 42???€? 08.2???€? W Long. It was actually easier to free oil at this location, but interestingly, marsh vegetation near this position was not heavily oiled. Stirring the sediments easily created heavy rainbow sheen and small oil droplets were observed. Using a stake, a portion of the sediment was brought to the surface; the sediment appeared to be saturated with oil. Again, the source of this pollution is unknown. Such locations are not common at the spill site, but at least two such locations have been identified. Future Plans The investigation continues. NOAA has been tasked with investigating winds and tides prior to the observation of the spill to investigate possible additional sources. Site photographs will be added when the SSC returns to the office. [SEP] 133 [SEP] Potash Mystery Spill Potash, LA On the evening of April 26, 2004 the NOAA Scientific Support, Gulf Region was notified of a mystery pipeline spill in a marsh area near Potash, LA, west of Port Sulfur, LA. The NOAA Gulf Region Scientific Support Office was contacted and given five locations where there is an estimated 50 bbls of crude oil (total). The five locations are: 29d 28???€?26???€?N, 089d 42???€?04???€?W 29d 28???€?30.7N, 089d 42???€?03.9???€?W 29d 28???€?49???€?N, 089d 42???€?11???€?W 29d 28???€?23???€?N, 089d 42???€?42???€?W 29d28???€?37???€?N, 089 42???€?40???€?W USCG MSO New Orleans is currently on scene. Contractors are also on scene cleaning up. A resources at risk analysis was requested and has been provided.
A mystery spill occurred in Terrebone Bay, LA.  A slick 1 mile long was reported.  NOAA provided weather. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
At the time the vessel grounded it was loaded with bauxite and 280 metric tons of a heavy fuel oil and 14.34 metric tons of diesel. The vessel was refloated with no pollution released. [SEP] Oil Name = FUEL OIL NO.2 (DIESEL), STAR ENTERPRISE API = 34.5 Pour Point = 5 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 20 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 25 deg C Time of Initial Release = March 26, 0700 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 4,300 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 4,300 - 3 - 10 - 87 2 4,300 9 33 58 3 4,300 - 13 - 59 - 27 4 4,300 15 75 10 Oil Name = IFO 300 API = 11.9 Pour Point = 21 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 20 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 25 deg C Time of Initial Release = March 26, 0700 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 4,300 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 4,300 - 2 - 0 - 98 2 4,300 6 0 94 4 4,300 - 9 - 0 - 91 8 4,300 12 0 88 12 4,300 - 14 - 0 - 86 16 4,300 16 0 84 20 4,300 - 17 - 0 - 83 24 4,300 17 0 83 30 4,300 - 18 - 0 - 82 36 4,300 19 0 81 42 4,300 - 19 - 0 - 81 48 4,300 20 0 80 54 4,300 - 20 - 0 - 80 60 4,300 20 0 80 66 4,300 - 20 - 0 - 80 72 4,300 20 0 80 78 4,300 - 21 - 0 - 79 84 4,300 21 0 79 90 4,300 - 21 - 0 - 79 96 4,300 21 0 79 102 4,300 - 21 - 0 - 79 108 4,300 21 0 79 114 4,300 - 21 - 0 - 78 120 4,300 22 0 78 [SEP] This is an aerial view of the grounded vessel with the coastline. [SEP] Date: March 26, 2004 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded Cargo Vessel, Fort Lauderdale FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Debra Simecek-Beatty, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of the heavy fuel oil that may be released from a cargo vessel. These notes are based on the following information: A cargo vessel ran aground at 26?? 07.06???€?N, 80?? 5.57???€?W?? (about half a mile off Fort Lauderdale Beach) sometime overnight. The vessel is carrying approximately 280 metric tons (about 75, 000 gallons) of heavy fuel oil and 14.3 metric tons (4,300 gallons) of diesel. At this time, the vessel is grounded and not leaking product. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) TRAJECTORY The weather forecast indicates winds will easterly at about 20 to 25 knots for the next 24-hours. If the vessel should leak product during this period, it is likely that within one hour of the release the bulk of the released product would move due west and onshore threatening the shoreline from the north jetty of the entrance to Port Everglades and northward to Birch Ocean Front. We would not anticipate oil moving through the jetties and into Port Everglades. However, long shore transport and associated rip currents could move small amounts of oil offshore. On-scene observations of the rip currents (return cells) would be needed to further assess the movement of any offshore oil behavior. Since a spill may occur in an area with sandy beaches and high surf, there is a possibility of oil droplets adhering to suspended sand particles in the water column. The combined oil-sediment particle can either remain suspended in the water column or slowly settle to the bottom when the water conditions become more quiescent. Also, any stranded oil that is transported off a sandy beach maybe transported subsurface. The high surf may result in buried oil on the shoreline and in offshore areas. 2) Oil Weathering Heavy Fuel Oil Heavy refined products, such as Intermediate Fuel Oils (IFO) are routinely made by mixing a diesel (Fuel Oil No. 2) with a heavy residual oil or with the residuum from the refining process itself. The exact composition of an IFO can vary depending on the properties of the constituents. However, IFO's are often sold as IFO180 and IFO380. These designations indicate the final product meets certain specifications. Both are viscous fluids, IFO180 has a viscosity of 180 centistokes (cSt) at 50??C and, IFO380 has a viscosity of 360 cSt at 50??C. However, the specific gravity or API of the final product for either designation can vary significantly between 0.99 - 0.95; API gravity 11.5.0-35. When spilled in the marine environment, the oil will change physical properties as it ages and may result in quite persistent floating pollutant problems. Up to one-third of the oil may evaporate in the first 24 hours of the spill but this is very much dependent on the amount of diesel in the IFO. These oils can occasionally form an emulsification or mousse, but usually only slowly, and after a period of days. Again, depending on the mixture, up to 30% of the mouse can be water. IFOs may not spread into very thin films and often simply break up in smaller patches and then tarballs. It is also common for these oils to lose enough of their light ends so that they do not rapidly form sheens and the resulting scattered tarball fields are very difficult to observe using visual, or remote sensing techniques. This, combined with the persistence of the tarballs, makes these kinds of spills quite likely to result in long range, and occasionally unexpected, beach impacts. Particularly if a small amount of product is moved off shore in a rip current. 3) Oil Weathering Diesel Oil Lighter refined products, such as diesel, typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring (in the case of diesel) is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. We would anticipate that much of the diesel would evaporate or disperse in the first four hours of the release. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Fort Lauderdale/Port Everglades I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 11:00 am EST on 26 March 2004. Information in this report is based on a spill of 244 metric tons of HFO. Presently, the dry bulk freighter Eastwind is aground off of the Fort Lauderdale coast. II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers the beaches several miles north and south of the grounding site. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material With the relatively high east winds and associated wave activity, the oil is likely to be mixed into the water column near the shore. In addition there will be high suspended sediment loads, which may adhere to the oil. This could result in the oil becoming heavier than water and sinking. The oil is expected to have a low water soluble component, so there would be minimal impacts to animals that live in the water column. Once onshore, the oil would likely coat the intertidal zone of the shoreline. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk All of the outer beaches in this area are coarse-grained sand beaches. The only inlet in the area is at Port Everglades. Inside the inlet, the shorelines at the inlet and to the north are all seawalls. The shorelines to the south of the inlet are sheltered marshes and mangroves, with some riprap. On the outer beaches the oil will leave a band of oil in the intertidal zone starting at the high tide line. The width of the band is dependent upon the amount of oil that comes ashore at a given location. The oil may penetrate 5- 10 cm into the sediment. There is also a risk of the oil being buried, if the wind shifts. On the seawalls a band of oil will form at the high tide line. Oil may coat the vegetation in marshes
Raffinate was spilled when a barge had a collision in Galveston Bay, TX. NOAA provided weather. [SEP] BARGE M407 SPILL, HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL, TEXAS 0640 CST, Saturday March 20, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (03/20): 1831 Sunrise (03/21): 0621 Sunset (03/21): 1832 Current Observation: (Buoy 42035 - 0500 CST) winds from the E-SE at 6 knots. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the south at 10 knots. Tonight, SE winds at 8-10 knots are predicted to decrease to 3-5 knots by the late evening hours. Sunday, NE winds at 10 knots are forecast to increase to 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. _________________________ Waves: Today through Sunday, the seas in Galveston Bay are expected to be 1 foot or less. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through tonight, no precipitation is predicted. Sunday, widely scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms are forecast. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies are expected. Tonight, partly cloudy skies are predicted to diminish to sea fog by the evening hours. Sunday, sea fog is forecast to lift to partly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted except during times of showers and fog. Fog could limit visibility to less than 1 mile. _________________________ Inversion Height: Today, an inversion height of 800-900 feet is expected to lift to 1500 feet by the afternoon hours. Tonight, a 1300 foot inversion height is predicted to decrease to 300 feet by the late evening hours. Sunday, a 300 foot inversion height is forecast to lift to 800 feet by the afternoon hours. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 70's to lows in the 60's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the east at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas slightly choppy. Mostly cloudy skies with possible evening fog. Chance of showers and rain. Tuesday, SE winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Slightly choppy seas. Possible morning fog lifting to mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. Wednesday, SE winds at 15 knots are forecast. Seas slightly choppy. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about a raffinate release from a barge as a result of a collision with a tanker in Galveston Bay, TX [SEP] BARGE M407 SPILL, HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL, TEXAS 1600 CST, Saturday March 20, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (03/20): 1831 Sunrise (03/21): 0621 Sunset (03/21): 1832 Current Observation: (Buoy 42035 - 1400 CST) winds from the E-SE at 4 knots. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the east at 5-7 knots. Sunday, N-NE winds at 5-10 knots are predicted to shift and be from the NE at 10-15 knots by the late morning hours. Sunday night, NE winds at 15 knots are forecast. _________________________ Waves: Tonight through Sunday night, the seas in Galveston Bay are expected to be slightly choppy to choppy. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Sunday, widely scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms are predicted. Sunday night, chance of light drizzle is forecast. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, partly cloudy skies are expected to diminish to sea fog by the evening hours. Sunday, the sea fog is predicted to lift to partly cloudy skies by the morning hours. Sunday night, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted except during times of showers and fog. Fog could limit visibility to less than 1 mile. _________________________ Inversion Height: Tonight, a 1300 foot inversion height is predicted to decrease to 300 feet by the late evening hours. Sunday, a 300 foot inversion height is forecast to lift to 800 feet by the afternoon hours. Sunday night, a 3500 foot inversion height is expected. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 70's to lows in the 60's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday, the winds are expected to be from the east at 10 knots. Seas slightly choppy. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. Tuesday, SE winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas slightly choppy. Mostly cloudy skies. Chance of showers and rain. Wednesday, SE winds at 15 knots are forecast. Seas slightly choppy to choppy. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. [SEP] Date: 1530 CST March 19, 2004 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Raffinate Spill, Galveston Bay TX FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a release of raffinate in Galveston Bay. These notes are based on the following information: At approximately 1445 today (March 19, 2004) a tanker and tug with barge collided in lower Galveston Bay in the Houston Ship Channel near buoys 25-26 east of the Texas City Dike with a reported position of 29deg 23.73min N, 094deg 48.882min W. The barge is currently leaking the raffinate product, but no fuel is leaking from any of the vessels. The USCG is considering moving the vessel to 29deg 23min N, 094deg 48.8min W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast This afternoon, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 10-15 knots gusting to 17 knots shifting to be from the SE at 5-10 knots by the evening hours. Saturday, SE winds at 5-10 knots are predicted to increase to 10 knots gusting to 13 knots by the afternoon hours. 2) TRAJECTORY At the time of the spill, the tide was flooding, with the maximum flood occurring at approximately 1610 today, with slack tide at 2154 this evening. With the flood tide and the E-SE winds, the winds and tides will both move the product further into the bay. Any product that persists into the evening, by 2100 tonight the product could contact shoreline from the northern side of the Texas City Dike as far north as Eagle Point. Overnight, with the change in tides the product could move into Bolivar Roads, around to the south side of the Texas City Dike and Shoal Point, and the northern portion of Pelican Island. The proposed new position for the barge does not significantly change the trajectory forecast. 3) OIL FATE Raffinate is a light petroleum distillate dominated by hydrocarbons between nC-4 and nC-8 (much like gasoline). We would expect the product would behave similarly to spilled gasoline. We would also expect that the flammability of this product may be significantly greater than gasoline and ignition sources near any leak are a serious concern. The material could easily flash back creating a dangerous explosive risk. Inhalation hazards to humans are another potential concern within a couple hundred yards downwind. Dizziness and nausea could occur to the point that safe operation of vessels or equipment would be affected. There is also the problem of exposure to carcinogens from the product. Water column resources could also be at risk. Localized fish kills could be expected in the immediate area of the barge. [SEP] BARGE RAFFINATE SPILL, HOUSTON SHIP CHANNEL 1520 CST, Friday March 19, 2004 NOTE: This is a site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (03/19): 1831 Sunrise (03/20): 0622 Sunset (03/20): 1831 Current Observation: (Buoy 42035 - 1300 CST) winds from the E at 10 knots. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: This afternoon, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 10-15 knots gusting to 17 knots shifting to be from the SE at 5-10 knots by the evening hours. Saturday, SE winds at 5-10 knots are predicted to increase to 10 knots gusting to 13 knots by the afternoon hours. Saturday night, variable winds at less than 5 knots are forecast. _________________________ Waves: This afternoon through Saturday night, the seas in Galveston Bay entrance are expected to be 1 foot. _________________________ Precipitation: This afternoon through Saturday, dry weather is predicted. Saturday night, slight chance of late evening showers are forecast. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: This afternoon through Saturday night, partly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted except during times of showers. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 70's to lows in the 60's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the east at 10-15 knots by the evening hours. Seas 1 foot. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. Monday, east winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas 1-2 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of showers. Tuesday through Wednesday, SE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Seas 1-2 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Slight chance
A 20 mile long mystery slick was reported in the intracoastal waterway in North Carolina.  NOAA provided weather.
Two ships collided in Southwest Pass approximately 8 miles south of Head of Passes, LA - Lat 29, 2.4N, Long 89, 19.6W, at 5:30 CST. The freighter Zim Mexico collided with the OSV Lee III. The OSV Lee III sunk with 5 people on board. The people crew were not rescued. The OSV LEE III had the capacity to hold 30 thousand gallons of diesel. . A light sheen was seen by the NOAA SSC 2 miles south of the sunken vessel. Little diesel was released from the vessel. Clean-up was completed Feb 22. Salvage was completed Feb 25. [SEP] By the end of the day on 22 Feb., the primary cleanup was completed. On 25 Feb., the OSV was moved from the center channel toward the Left Descending Bank (LDB) to allow reopening of the river to deep draft ship traffic. Very little pollution was released during this operation since the vessel was not righted from its current capsized position. Salvage operations continue and an environmental protection strategy is in place. The NOAA SSC has maintained communication with the RP???€?s response/spill management team and will redeploy on- site if needed as part of the USCG response. At present, the best estimate as to when salvage operations will create a potential second release is sometime this weekend. Additional information to follow... [SEP] (Photo credit, NOAA SSC) [SEP] The attached overflight photographs were taken by the NOAA SSC on the morning of 21 February less than five hours after the collision. [SEP] OSV LEE III SALVAGE OP, MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SW PASS, LOUISIANA 1020 CST, Wednesday February 25, 2004 Sunset (02/25): 1758 Sunrise (02/26):0632 Sunset (02/26): 1759 Current Observation (Burlwoood): S at 11 knots gusting to 12 knots. _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the south at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the N-NW at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight through Thursday, NW winds at 20 knots are predicted. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Thursday, choppy seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, scattered showers are predicted to diminish then showers and thunderstorms are likely by the afternoon hours. Tonight, scattered showers and thunderstorms are forecast. Thursday, dry weather is expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through tonight, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Visibility is expected to be 5-7+ miles except during times of rain. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 60's to lows in the 40's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 15 knots. Seas choppy. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Saturday, SE winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Seas choppy. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Sunday, SW winds at 15-20 knots are forecast. Seas choppy. Cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] (Photo credit, NOAA SSC) [SEP] OSV LEE SPILL, MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SW PASS, LOUISIANA 1150 CST, Saturday February 21, 2004 Sunset (02/21): 1755 Sunrise (02/22):0636 Sunset (02/22): 1756 Current Observation (Burlwoood): N-NE winds at 16 knots. _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the north at 15-20 knots shifting to be from the NE at 12-13 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, NE winds at 12-13 knots are predicted to shift and be from the E-SE at 10-15 knots by the late evening hours. Sunday, SE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to increase to 15 knots with gusts to 20 knots by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Sunday, choppy seas are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Sunday, no precipitation is predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, mostly clear skies are expected. Tonight, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Sunday, partly cloudy skies are forecast to diminish to overcast skies by the evening hours. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Air Temperatures: Air temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 60's to lows in the 40's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 15-20 knots shifting to be from the S-SE at 20 knots by the afternoon hours. Choppy seas. Overcast skies. Rain and showers. Tuesday, S-SW winds at 15 knots with gusts to 20 knots are predicted to increase to 20 knots with gusts to 25 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas choppy. Overcast skies. Rain and showers. Wednesday, SW winds at 20-25 knots are forecast. Seas choppy. Overcast skies. Chance of showers. Hydrology (Mississippi River ???€? New Orleans): The surface velocity is expected to be 3.9 ???€? 4.0 knots during the next few days. Current flow of the Mississippi River at New Orleans is approximately 833,000 CFS. River Forecast (Flood Stage at New Orleans: 17 feet) Date: 2/21 2/22 2/23 2/24 2/25 Gauge Ht (ft): 12.2 12.4 12.4 12.3 11.9 [SEP] Evening Report: 22 February 2004 There have been no reports of any recovered survivors from the OSV LEE III, but search efforts continue under the direction of the USCG. It was reported that Navy divers have attempted to determine if any crewmembers are alive and trapped within the vessel using a sophisticated acoustic system, but no positive results were reported. The apparent loss of all five ship???€?s crew has created a somber atmosphere within the on-scene command post. Yesterday evening (day one of the response), one of the spill responders discovered a stranded hardhat adjacent to the stranded diesel fuel. The found hardhat was marked with the name of the sunken vessel. The hardhat currently rests within the command post providing a silent reminder of the tragic accident. Rainbow sheens continue to be released by the sunken vessel. There is no estimate as to the volume of fuel released to date or remaining fuel oil aboard. Containment and exclusion booms have been deployed and oil recovery efforts continue. The current cleanup strategy was to use a combination of low pressure flushing to move the oil out of the riprap followed by mechanical recovery using drum skimmers. By the end of the day, most of the accessible pooled and flushable diesel fuel had been recovered. There is oil still trapped in riprap. Additional hard boom and sorbent boom have been deployed to help mitigate the diesel still leaking from the vessel. The lower Mississippi river remains closed. A wildlife recovery team has been deployed and coordinated by USFWS. USFWS also provided a floatplane to support response operations. The USCG participated with USFWS to secure aerial photography to support response planning. At the time this report was written, no report of oiled or injured wildlife was available. A salvage plan has been submitted to the USCG for review. The NOAA SSC, working within the Unified Command and as part of the USCG response team, has been actively involved in providing input into the environmental protection plan. On Monday, the salvers plan a survey dive, but it may be several days before the actual salvage operation is conducted. It was reported that the divers would attempt to plug the fuel tank vents as part of the salvage effort. The NOAA SSC has departed the Lee III command post, but will return to the site as needed. Background Information Before daylight on the morning of 21 February 2004, the M/V ZIM MEXICO III and the OSV Lee III collided within Southwest Pass on the lower Mississippi Delta. The cause of the accident is under investigation. The OSV was reported to have sunk almost immediately with five crewmembers aboard. The outbound OSV was reported to have 30,000 gallons of diesel aboard at the time of the collision. The reported location of the sunken vessel was N29?? 03.070???€? Latitude W89?? 18.852???€? Longitude. This position places the vessel on the Mississippi Delta, approximately 8.8 miles below head of passes and within Southwest Pass. Saturday morning (yesterday), the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC), along with USCG and Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ) representatives, was able to view the incident site and diesel pollution while on a Unified Command overflight to support the GENMAR ALEXANDRA spill response. At the time of the overflight, the Lee III was capsized and sunken at the stern: only the forward section of the bow remained visible above the water and an attached life raft served as a marker buoy. Diesel, in the form of sheens, was still leaking from the sunken vessel. Pools of red-dyed diesel was observed stranded in catchments along the Left Descending Bank (LDB) for approximately 1.5 miles down river, and on-water sheens were visible further down river, through the ???€?spillway cut???€? and to the end of the Southwest Pass. While observing the pollution problem, the members of the overflight also scanned the shoreline for possible survivors. Numerous migratory birds (primarily ducks) were observed in the area of the spill and this information was passed to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). While the spill site was not within the boundaries of the State and Federal wildlife management areas, it is located adjacent to these refuges and does quality habitat for migratory waterfowl as well as many other bird species. On
Near the Flower Garden Banks offshore of Texas a pipeline spilled 23 bbls of oil.  NOAA provided weather. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
A barge collided with a rig in Terrebone Bay, LA.  An unknown amount of oil was spilled.  NOAA provided weather. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
The spill was reported as a result of a tug striking a well head. Thesea-state is rough and a small release of a light condensate oil would easilybe naturally dispersed under such conditions. It was reported later, that "an overflight indicated only sheens, andthat they were heading out..." [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about an oil spill in South LA as a result of a tug striking a well head. [SEP] Initial and Final Report (19 January 2004) At the request of the USCG, NOAA investigated the possible trajectory implications of an oil spill in South Louisiana. At approximately 1330 hrs (local time) the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified of an oil spill in South Louisiana by MSO Morgan City. The spill was reported as a result of a tug striking a well head in Terrebonne-Timbalier Bay before noon at position Lat. 29?? 06.236???€? and Long. 090?? 31.783???€? (see attached map). Given that the information available at present is limited, i.e., no known volume or reliable on-scene observations, the trajectory should be considered as preliminary in scope. At present, the winds are out of the N at 20 knots and are expected to remain from the N over the next 24 hours. The sea-state is rough. With strong N winds, the oil would have most likely impacted the western end of Timbalier Island on the bay side. Some oil might escape through the pass into the Gulf of Mexico. Note, if the release is significant, there may be threatened/endangered species in the area that might be at risk (see attached Natural Resources at Risk Analysis). It was reported later, that "an overflight indicated only sheens, and that they were heading out..." The spill may not be as big of an environmental concern as initially thought. The sea state is very rough in the area, and a small release of a light condensate oil would easily be naturally dispersed under such conditions. The current sea state would also preclude any on-water response activities. Unless there are further developments, no additional NOAA response support is expected.
The SSC received a report on the morning of 12/16/03, from MSO Memphis that thetug JERRY JONES had struck a dike on the right descending bank of theMississippi River.  The accident took place Monday night (12/15) and hadreleases an unknown amount of diesel. Following an overflight on 12/16, a pocketof diesel was found behind a dike downstream of the incident. This pocketcontained app. 250 gallons of diesel fuel.The Tug Jerry Jones was patched on 12/16 and was sent on for repairs [SEP] TUG JERRY JONES SPILL, MISS. RIVER, MEMPHIS, TN 1130 CST, Tuesday December 16, 2003 Sunset (12/16): 1652 Sunrise (12/17):0702 Sunset (12/17): 1652 Current Observation (Memphis 1100 CST): winds from the NW at 14 knots _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the W-NW at 10-15 knots increasing to 15 knots and gusty by the afternoon hours. Tonight, W-NW winds at 10-15 knots with gusts to 20 knots are predicted. Wednesday, NW winds at 15 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, no precipitation is expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, overcast skies are predicted. Tonight, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Wednesday, mostly sunny skies are expected. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 40's to lows in the 30's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 10-15 knots. Mostly cloudy skies. Dry. Friday through Saturday, west winds at 10 knots are predicted. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Hydrology (Mississippi River ???€? near Memphis) Currently, the Mississippi River near Memphis, Tennessee has a flow of 535,000 CFS and the forecast is for the flow to slightly increase to a peak over the next four days to 565,000 CFS. The flood stage on the Mississippi River at Memphis is 34 feet. The 6 day forecast is as follows: Date: 12/16 12/17 12/18 12/19 12/20 12/21 Gauge (ft) 12.9 13.6 14.1 14.3 14.3 14.3 The current surface velocity of the Mississippi river near Memphis, Tennessee is expected to be 2.0-2.5 knots. [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 50 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 16, 0800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 250 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 250 - 18 - 37 - 45 3 250 21 51 28 4 250 - 22 - 60 - 18 5 250 22 65 12 [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 50 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 16, 0800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 100.0 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 2 100.0 - 19 - 40 - 41 3 100.0 21 52 26 4 100.0 - 22 - 60 - 17 5 100.0 23 66 11 [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the tug Jerry Jones which allided with a dike in the vicinity of Memphis, TN. [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 50 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 16, 0800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 100.0 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 100.0 - 12 - 6 - 82 2 100.0 19 13 69 4 100.0 - 25 - 25 - 51 6 100.0 27 34 39 8 100.0 - 29 - 40 - 31 10 100.0 30 46 25 12 100.0 - 30 - 50 - 20 18 100.0 31 58 11 [SEP] Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 mph Wave Height = computed from winds Water Temperature = 50 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 16, 0800 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 250 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 250 - 11 - 5 - 84 2 250 17 12 71 4 250 - 24 - 24 - 52 6 250 27 33 40 8 250 - 28 - 40 - 32 10 250 29 45 25 12 250 - 30 - 50 - 20 18 250 31 58 11 [SEP] The SSC received a report on the morning of 12/16/03, from MSO Memphis that the tug JERRY JONES had struck a dike on the right descending bank of the Mississippi River. The accident took place Monday night (12/15) and had releases an unknown amount of diesel. Following an overflight on 12/16, a pocket of diesel was found behind a dike downstream of the incident. This pocket contained app. 250 gallons of diesel fuel and was in position Lat 34&#8734; 52.15 N Long 090&#8734; 20.46 W. The oil had collected due to a SE wind, however the winds had changed to the NW and would blow the oil back into the river. The USCG was interested in determining how long the oil would take to dissipate. On Scene weather: NW winds 14 kts, temp 43&#8734;F, and overcast. Based on these conditions HAZMAT Seattle determined that only 11% of the product would remain after 18hrs. However, if any of the oil collects in pockets protected from the wind, it will not weather as quickly as predicted. The Tug Jerry Jones was patched on 12/16 and was sent on for repairs.
T/B B-80 was struck by the assist tug resulting in a compromise of the #1 Starbird tank. Capacity of the tank is 3800 BBLS. Vessel retuning to Conoco-Phillip PS Bayway NJ facility to offload. Cargo shifted aft to mitigate loss of product. Unknown amount in water at this time. Linden Fire Department applying foam to waterborne product. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the leaking gasoline barge B-80 in Arthur Kill, NY. [SEP] Date: 1730 EST December 11, 2003 To: NOAA SSC FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Barge B80, Arthur Kill, NJ FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-6317. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a gasoline spill from a holed barge in Arthur Kill. These notes are based on the following information: The Barge B80, carrying an undetermined amount of gasoline, was hit by a tug and holed at approximately 1600 EST this afternoon. An undetermined amount of gasoline was lost and the vessel did not continue to leak any product. The barge is located at the ConocoPhillips facility in Arthur Kill west of Pralls Island, NY. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 20-25 knots with gusts to 40 knots becoming 20-25 knots with gusts to 30 knots by the late evening hours. Friday, west winds at 15-20 knots are predicted to decrease to 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. 2) TRAJECTORY Strong winds with a westerly component in the forecast indicate that most of the oil that does not naturally disperse will be transported across Arthur Kill to the western shore of Pralls Island. At the site of the accident, there may be gasoline trapped in natural collection zones or under piers that may result in an explosion hazard. 3) OIL FATE There is a high flammability hazard associated with gasoline spills. Specifically, if a spill is kept from spreading freely by natural or man-made structures the gasoline slick might be thick enough to support ignition. In addition, vapor concentrations near the source of spill or vapors collected in sheltered areas can present an explosion hazard (see Health and Safety Considerations). Gasoline is considered a light refined product with a specific gravity that can range from 0.76 to 0.70 at 15??C (54 to 70 API). The product typically has a very high evaporation rate and does not tend to create persistent slicks. For most releases smaller than 100 barrels in open water conditions and with wind speeds greater than 5 knots, 90% of the gasoline would be expected to evaporate within the first 1 to 2 hours of the initial release. When spilled, the gasoline spreads quickly into thin films by forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film is common. Normally, this type of release does not become an involved cleanup problem. Please note that gasoline does have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tends to be more soluble and more toxic then heavier oils. In high energy environments, the gasoline will likely disperse as small droplets in the water column. Gasoline spills can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat particularly in low energy marine environments as often found in shallow bays and inlets.  Oil Name = GASOLINE (UNLEADED), SHELL API = unknown Pour Point = unknown Wind Speed = constant at 20 knots Wave Height = .5 ft Water Temperature = 40 deg F Time of Initial Release = December 11, 1400 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 1,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Remaining Spill gal percent percent 1 1,000 - 99 - 1 2 1,000 100 0 [SEP] BARGE B-80, ARTHUR KILL, NEW YORK 1700 EST, Thursday December 11, 2003 Sunset (12/11): 1630 Sunrise (12/12): 0711 Sunset (12/12): 1630 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 20-25 knots with gusts to 40 knots becoming 20-25 knots with gusts to 30 knots by the late evening hours. Friday, west winds at 15-20 knots are predicted to decrease to 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Friday night, west winds at 10 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NW at less than 10 knots by the late evening hours. _____________________________________ Waves (in Arthur Kill): Tonight, gale warning is predicted with seas expected to be choppy. Friday, light choppy seas are predicted to become smooth by the late evening hours. Friday night, smooth seas are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Friday night, no precipitation is expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Friday, mostly clear skies are forecast. Friday night, partly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be 5-7+ miles. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 40's to lows in the 20's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 5 knots or less shifting to be from the NE at 5 knots or less by the afternoon hours. Seas in Arthur Kill smooth. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Sunday, east winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas in Arthur Kill smooth. Mostly cloudy skies. Dry. Monday, NE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to increase to 20-25 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas in Arthur Kill smooth increasing to choppy by the afternoon hours. Mostly cloudy skies. Morning snow likely to become rain by the afternoon hours.
A mystery slick was reported 15 miles east of Pass A Loutre, LA on December 8, 2003.  The slick was 5 miles long and had 20% coverage.  NOAA provided weather and trajectories. [SEP] Date: 1700 CST December 8, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: Mystery Slick in Gulf of Mexico, East of Pass A Loutre FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a mystery slick reported in the Gulf of Mexico. These notes are based on the following information: A mystery slick with 20% black oil coverage was reported approx. 15 nm offshore of Pass A Loutre (Mississippi River). The leading edge was reported at 29?? 12.3???€?N, 088?? 39.2???€?W with the trailing edge at 29?? 09.4???€?N, 088?? 43.3???€?W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Today through tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the S at 15-20 knots shifting late in the day to be from the W at 20-25 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY Indications for salinity, satellite altimetry and satellite sea surface temperature indicate that the area of the spill has weak to moderate coastal currents (i.e. the Loop Current is not in the vicinity). The observer indicated the leading edge of the spill, estimating that the spill is heading NE. Over the next 24 hours we would expect the spill to move primarily with the winds, first NW tonight and then northward tomorrow, shifting to eastward with the shift in the wind. We would expect the spill to move offshore, overall toward the NNE. Tomorrow we estimate that the center of the spill will stay within a box bounded by 29?? 10???€? N on the south and 088?? 50???€? W on the west side, and 29?? 30???€? N on the north and 088?? 35???€? W on the east. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about a mystery slick reported 15 miles east of Pass A Loutre, LA. [SEP] Trajectory for mystery slick. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
At 1020 AM(EST), MSO Miami received a report that the 40 foot Tug New River capsized in the Lake Worth Inlet at position 26-46N; 080-02.9W.  This position is near the turning basin just south of Peanut Island.  The vessel had a total of 2000 gallons of diesel fuel on board.The tug was pulled over and grounded on Peanut Island where offloading and salvage operations could be conducted.  It was estimated that approximately 300 gallons of the diesel had spilled.The NOAA SSC was contacted and provided weather, tides and oil fate information. [SEP] TUG SPILL, LAKE WORTH, FLORIDA 1130 EST, Friday December 4, 2003 Sunset (12/05): 1727 Sunrise (12/06): 0655 Sunset (12/06): 1727 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 20-25 knots decreasing to 15-20 knots by the late afternoon hours. Tonight, SE winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Friday, south winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NW at 10-15 knots by the evening hours. _____________________________________ Waves (nearshore): Today, the seas are expected to be 6 feet decreasing to 4 feet by the late afternoon hours. Tonight, 4 foot seas are predicted. Friday, 2 foot seas are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Friday, isolated showers are expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the upper 70's to lows in the lower 70's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 20-25 knots. Nearshore seas 2-3 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Sunday, NW winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Nearshore seas 6 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Monday, NE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Nearshore seas 5 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the capsized tug New River, Lake Worth Inlet, FL.
Barge grounded; 18K #2 pot; diesel; Wx/Verbal [SEP] Date: December 2, 2003 1900 EST To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Barge Kristen Poling FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Debra Simecek-Beatty, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________________________ Per your request we have looked at trajectory implications of the potential Fuel Oil #2 spill. These notes are based on the following information: On December 2, 2003 at approximately 1700 EST, the barge Kristen Poling grounded at 40?? 35.1???€?N, 73?? 44.4???€?W (off Atlantic Beach, New York). The barge is carrying 18,000 barrels of Fuel Oil No. 2. At this time, the vessel is not leaking product. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ________________________________________________________________________ 1) WINDS Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 18 knots. Wednesday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Wednesday night, NW winds at 8- 12 knots are forecast. 2) TRAJECTORY While the tidal currents at the entrance of East Rockaway Inlet are strong (about 2 knots), there are weak rotary currents along the outer coast and in the vicinity of the grounded vessel. As a result, we would not expect much net movement of the oil due to the tidal currents. The longshore currents are very much dependent on the strength and direction of the waves. Since the winds are strong from the northwest, the waves and the subsequent alongshore transport are likely weak. Therefore, the winds are likely to dominate oil transport rather than the current. Some oil will likely come ashore in the vicinity of the barge. However, oil is less likely to be transported around Silver Pt. and through East Rockaway Inlet due to the strong northwest winds. For the next 24-hours, much of the oil will probably move offshore and to the southeast. 3) OIL WEATHERING Lighter refined products, such as Fuel Oil No. 2 and diesel, typically have very high evaporation rates and do not create persistent slicks. When spilled, the oil spreads quickly into thin films, often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. The diesel, if spilled during the present high wind conditions, should disperse or evaporate within a day or a day and a half of the end of the spillage. A significant amount is expected to disperse into the water column. If the winds calm down, some resurfacing is likely with scattered local sheens. If the spill occurs during weaker wind conditions, the surface slicks will be more persistent. If the diesel reaches the shoreline, a soot-like bathtub ring is common. These oils don't usually form a stable emulsion and, as a result, don't produce a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. It should be noted that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. So, even though these oils may not present an involved cleanup problem, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat problem in low energy marine environments. [SEP] BARGE KRISTIN POLING, EAST CONEY ISLAND, NEW YORK 1830 EST, Tuesday December 02, 2003 Sunset (12/02):1628 Sunrise (12/03):0701 Sunset (12/03):1628 Current Observation: (JFK Airport) winds from the NW at 25 knots gusting to 35 knots. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 18 knots. Wednesday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Wednesday night, NW winds at 8-12 knots are forecast. _________________________ Waves: Tonight through Wednesday, the seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. Wednesday night, 1 foot seas are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Wednesday night, no precipitation is forecast. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, mostly clear skies are expected. Wednesday through Wednesday night, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be unrestricted. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 30's to lows in the 20's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the west at 10 knots shifting to be from the east at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 1-2 feet increasing to 2 feet by the afternoon hours. Partly cloudy skies becoming mostly cloudy by the afternoon hours. Dry weather becoming a chance of rain and snow showers after midnight. Friday, NE winds at 20-25 knots are predicted. Seas 3-4 feet increasing to 4-8 feet by the afternoon hours. Overcast skies. Chance of rain and snow showers. Saturday, NE winds at 25 knots are forecast. Seas 4-8 feet. Overcast skies. Chance of rain and snow showers. [SEP] Tidal heights at East Rockaway Inlet, Long Island Sound, south side Station No. 1507 Latitude: 40??36.00' Longitude: 073??44.00' Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:07 Low Water -00:14 High water height difference: (*0.88+0.00) Low water height difference : (*0.90+0.00) Based on Sandy Hook From Tue 12/02/2003 to Fri 12/05/2003 Local Standard Time Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 12/02/2003 02:40 + 3.7 High Tue 08:54 + 0.6 Low 14:56 + 3.8 High 21:14 + 0.2 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/03/2003 03:36 + 3.8 High Wed 09:48 + 0.5 Low 15:53 + 3.7 High 22:00 + 0.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/04/2003 04:28 + 4.0 High Thu 10:37 + 0.4 Low 16:45 + 3.7 High 22:43 + 0.1 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 12/05/2003 05:13 + 4.2 High Fri 11:23 + 0.2 Low 17:31 + 3.8 High 23:24 + 0.1 Low [SEP] Tidal currents at East Rockaway Inlet, LONG ISLAND, South Coast Station No. 3546 Meter Depth: n/a Latitude: 40??35.40' Longitude: 073??45.30' Maximum Flood Direction: 042?? Maximum Ebb Direction: 227?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood -01:46 Flood -01:35 Minimum Before Ebb -01:03 Ebb -01:38 Flood Speed Ratio: 1.3 Ebb Speed Ratio : 1.2 Based on The Narrows (New York) From Tue 12/02/2003 to Fri 12/05/2003 Local Standard Time Date Time Max Vel(kt) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 12/02/2003 00:24 + 2.0 Max Flood Tue 03:43 0.0 Min Before Ebb 06:27 - 2.0 Max Ebb 09:46 0.0 Min Before Flood 12:46 + 1.8 Max Flood 15:57 0.0 Min Before Ebb 18:48 - 2.2 Max Ebb 22:10 0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 12/03/2003 01:25 + 2.0 Max Flood Wed 04:42 0.0 Min Before Ebb 07:21 - 2.1 Max Ebb 10:44 0.0 Min Before Flood 13:51 + 1.7 Max Flood 16:50 0.0 Min Before Ebb 19:34 - 2.2 Max Ebb 22:58 0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 12/04/2003 02:20 + 2.2 Max Flood Thu 05:34 0.0 Min Before Ebb 08:09 - 2.2 Max Ebb 11:39 0.0 Min Before Flood 14:45 + 1.7 Max Flood 17:38 0.0 Min Before Ebb 20:18 - 2.2 Max Ebb 23:44 0.0 Min Before Flood ------------------------------------------------------- 12/05/2003 03:05 + 2.3 Max Flood Fri 06:19 0.0 Min Before Ebb 08:55 - 2.3 Max Ebb 12:30 0.0 Min Before Flood 15:31 + 1.7 Max Flood 18:22 0.0 Min Before Ebb 21:01 - 2.2 Max Ebb [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information on the NOAA response to the grounding of the barge Kristin Poling near Rockaway Inlet, New York, 2 December 2003. [SEP] The barge owner is attempting to lighter 6,800 barrels of cargo from the #1 and 2 tanks onto a smaller barge late tonight. By 0330 tomorrow morning (12/3) they hope to be able to refloat the grounded barge. This corresponds with the time of the next high tide. The captain of the barge thinks that due to the wind blowing out of the bay the tide was down about 2.5 feet. [SEP] The vessel was refloated at the 0330 high tide. No pollution occurred from the vessel. Once refloated it was allowed to go to its destination.
On the afternoon of 2 December 2003, the NOAA SSC was notified of a collision between a barge and tanker at the intersection of the Mobile Ship Channel and the Inter-coastal Waterway (ICW). Two tanks were reported holed on the tanker: a 5000 bbl gasoline cargo tank and a 7000 bbl diesel cargo tank. The location of the incident was reported as N 30 deg 16.659' Latitude W 088 deg 02.090' Longitude. NOAA investigated the potential threats from the reported collision. While the collision did result in significant damage to the tanker, the USCG reported that very little gasoline and probably no diesel fuel was released to the environment. [SEP] From Glen Watabayashi NOAA [SEP] SHIP COLLISION, MOBILE BAY, ALABAMA 0930 CST, Wednesday December 3, 2003 Sunset (12/04): 1651 Sunrise (12/05): 0634 Sunset (12/05): 1651 Current Observations (Daulphin Island): east winds at 16 knots gusting to 24 knots. _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the east at 16 knots shifting to be from the E-SE at 18-22 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, SE winds at 20 knots are predicted to become variable at 10-15 knots by the late evening hours. Thursday, west winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NW at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Thursday, choppy to rough seas in the Bay are expected. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through tonight, numerous showers are predicted. Thursday, morning showers are forecast to diminish to dry weather by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, mostly cloudy skies are expected to become overcast by the afternoon hours. Tonight, overcast skies are predicted. Thursday, overcast skies are forecast to become partly cloudy by the afternoon hours. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted except during times of showers. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 60's to lows in the 40's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday through Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 20-25 knots and gusty. Seas rough to very rough in the Bay. Partly cloudy to mostly clear skies. Dry. Sunday, NW winds at 20 knots are predicted to shift and be from the NE at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas rough to very rough in the Bay. Partly cloudy to mostly cloudy skies. Dry. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Mobile Bay Collision I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 19:00 EST on 2 December 2003. Information in the report is based on a spill of 5,000 bbls of gasoline and 7,000 bbls of diesel fuel released in Mobile Bay at the intersection of the Mobile Ship Channel and Intercoastal Waterway. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this spill is the southwestern portion of Mobile Bay, the entrance to the Mobile Bay, and the eastern end of Dauphin Island. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material The gasoline is highly volatile and also has a relatively high water soluble component. Most of this product will evaporate fairly quickly. However with the volume spilled water column impacts may occur, especially in the vicinity of the release. Diesel fuel is more persistent and is likely to cause more impacts than the gasoline. The water soluble components of the diesel may impact animals in shallow water areas and intertidal zones. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline along Mobile Bay is mostly sand beaches, with some sections of riprap and seawalls. Marshes are the dominant shoreline in Dauphin Bay, Graveling Bay, and the northern side of Mississippi Sound. If the diesel is washed up into the marshes and trapped then it may penetrate into the sediments and could potentially kill the marsh vegetation. V. Biological Resources at Risk Shellfish ???€? There are major oyster beds in and around Grants Pass and Pas aux Herons (the passes between Mobile Bay and Mississippi Sound) and the portions of Mobile Bay adjoining those passes. With the shallow waters and the relatively high solubility of the products spilled it is possible that these oysters may become contaminated. Birds ???€? Piping plovers (Federally endangered) are present along the shorelines of Bon Secour National Wildlife Refuge, just west of the spill site. There may also be some rafts of overwintering waterfowl in the area. Mammals ???€? The Alabama beach mouse (Federally endangered) is present on Mobile Point. These animals are not likely to be impacted directly by the spill, but regarding any cleanup operations in the area USFWS should be consulted. Habitats ???€? There are scattered small patches of seagrass beds along the western shore of Mobile Bay as well as in Dauphin Bay and Heron Bay. VI. Human-Use Resources at Risk Bon Secour National Wildlife Refuge is on the eastern end of Dauphin Island. Fort Morgan State Park is at Mobile Point. [SEP] On the afternoon of 2 December 2003, the NOAA SSC was notified of a collision between a barge and tanker at the intersection of the Mobile Ship Channel and the Inter-coastal Waterway (ICW). Two tanks were reported holed on the tanker: a 5000 bbl gasoline cargo tank and a 7000 bbl diesel cargo tank. The location of the incident was reported as N 30?? 16.659 Latitude W 088?? 02.090 Longitude. NOAA investigated the potential threats from the reported collision. Attached as separate ResponseLink entries are a series of trajectories that characterize a worse case release (the entire 7000 bbl is lost to the environment), the weather, tides, and Recourses at Risk (RAR). Each was faxed to the MSO. No additional information is known at present. [SEP] Final Report While the collision did result in significant damage to the tanker, the USCG reports that very little gasoline and probably no diesel fuel was released to the environment. The vessel has been secured in port, and is not thought to present any additional environmental concern. Unless the situation changes, this update will constituent the final entry on the barge-tanker collision in Mobile Bay. [SEP] SHIP COLLISION, MOBILE BAY, ALABAMA 1630 CST, Tuesday December 02, 2003 Sunset (12/02): 1651 Sunrise (12/03): 0632 Sunset (12/03): 1651 Current Observation: (Dauphin Island C-Man) winds from north at 8 knots gusting to 9 knots. 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the north at 8-10 knots shifting to be from the NE at 8-10 knots by the late evening hours. Wednesday, E-NE winds at 10- 15 knots gusting to 18 knots are predicted to shift and be from the SE at 10-15 knots by the late morning hours. Wednesday night, SE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to shift and be from the south at 10-15 knots by the late evening hours. _________________________ Waves: Tonight through Wednesday, moderate choppy seas are expected. Wednesday night, smooth to light choppy seas are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight, dry weather is forecast. Wednesday, likely morning showers increasing to numerous showers and scattered thunderstorms by the afternoon hours. Wednesday night, numerous showers and scattered thunderstorms are expected. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Wednesday, partly cloudy skies are forecast to diminish to mostly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Wednesday night, mostly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted except during times of showers. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 60's to lows in the 40's. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the south at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the NW at 10 knots by the late morning hours. Thursday afternoon, NW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas light chop. Mostly cloudy skies clearing to partly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Morning isolated showers clearing by the afternoon hours. Friday, north winds at 15-20 knots with higher gusts are predicted. Seas moderate chop. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Saturday, north winds at 20 knots are forecast to decrease to 15 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas moderate chop. Mostly clear skies. Dry. [SEP] Tidal heights at MOBILE, Mobile River Station No. 4251 Latitude: 30??41.00' Longitude: 088??02.00' Time offsets Hour:Min High Water 00:00 Low Water 00:00 High water height difference: (*1.00+0.00) Low water height difference : (*1.00+0.00) Based on Mobile From Tue 12/02/2003 to Fri 12/05/2003 Local Standard Time Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 12/02/2003 02:06 + 1.0 Low Tue 04:30 + 1.0 High 13:51 + 0.5 Low 22:38 + 1.1 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/03/2003 09:41 + 0.6 Low Wed 21:53 + 1.2 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/04/2003 07:42 + 0.4 Low Thu 21:14 + 1.4 High ------------------------------------------------------- 12/05/2003 07:52 + 0.1 Low Fri 21:16 + 1.5 High [SEP] From Glen Watabayashi NOAA [SEP] Tidal currents at Entrance to Mississippi Sound, Pass Aux Herons, MOBILE BAY Station No. 8476 Meter Depth: n/a Latitude: 30??17.30' Longitude: 088??07.80' Maximum Flood Direction: 068?? Maximum Ebb Direction: 245?? Time offsets Hour:Min Minimum Before Flood 00:09 Flood 00:15 Minimum Before Ebb 00:22 Ebb
At approximately 10:30 AM (local time), an estimated 50 bbl oil spill was observed in Barataria Bay, South Louisiana. The location was reported as N 29 deg 19.67' Lat. W 089 deg 58.67' Long. The source of the leak was initially unknown. Later the pipeline was identified and shut in, but not until a reported 350 bbl of crude oil was released. At the request of the USCG, NOAA provided a trajectory, a Resources and Risk analysis and on-scene support. [SEP] At present, containment and passive recovery efforts are continuing. The last time the Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) visited the site was on 5 January 2004, but a field trip is planned for 21 January. Overflight reports provided by the RP continue to identify visible residual oil and mousse in one small section of E Racoon Island. Other than that location, no visible oil has been observed by aerial survey within the spill area. Notes from 5 January Field Trip: The NOAA SSC participated with the RP on both an overflight of Raccon Island and a beach survey of the shell beach located on the N side of E Racoon Island on Monday, 5 January 2004. A snapshot of those field observations follows: Marsh. Sheens were still visible within the containment area indicating that free oil was still trapped in the broken marsh, but the majority of the sheens were limited to just one section of the marsh, a zone identified as RE07. Very little sheen and emulsified oil was observed in RE01 and RE02. No oil was observed in the other areas of Racoon Island. Most of the deployed snare-type boom (pom-pom on a rope) had sunk and was ineffective. It was recommended that the pom-poms sorbents should be removed since they are providing little if any passive recovery, and that round sorbent boom be maintained and repositioned in key areas for continued passive recovery. Hard boom should be maintained to provide containment of the spill area (in particular the area identified as RE07), but may be removed in areas where it is no longer of containment value. Shell Beach. At the shell beach (N beach in section RE01), there was significant improvement from a month ago, but oil was still trapped in the soft middle intertidal zone composed of peat and soft sediment under a veneer of shell. It was soft along this zone, and your boots would sink 3 to 4 inches in most areas. Footprints created would show pooled oil droplets seeping into the depressions. In only one small area was visible sheen observed (and it was confined to a shallow depression). The harder packed upper tidal zone of the beach contained only oil stain and some lightly oiled wrack (a remnants from one of the past storms). The snare-type boom (pom-pom on a rope) that had been deployed along the front of the island had broken and washed ashore. Like the hard boom that was placed along the N shore previously, it did not survive storms given the direct exposure to N winds. It was recommended that the pom-pom sorbents be removed and the area left for natural recovery. Loose oiled wrack should be removed along the upper intertidal zone. Any actions to mechanically flush the oil out of the soft substrate would create physical damage and possibly enhance erosion. The net trade-off would suggest that natural reworking of the beach face by storms would have the least overall environmental impact. [SEP] The attached pictures were taken during an evening overflight of the spill site. [SEP] The attached pictures were taken during an evening overflight of the spill site. [SEP] Evening Report (4 December 2003) At approximately 4:00 PM (local time), most field operations were cancelled due to approaching weather. A cold front is currently passing through southern Louisiana with forecasted winds of 10 to 20 kts (and higher) for Thursday evening through Saturday. Such conditions will not allow safe small boat operations. NOAA weather support was important in planning response activities and assessing the approaching cold front relative to responder safety concerns. The spill was apparently caused by the failure of a 12???€? pipeline. A longitudinal split has been identified, and a repair plan is being developed. The total volume spilled was estimated at 365 bbl by the RP. At the end of the day, some 165 bbls of oil and emulsified oil have been recovered. More than 20,000???€? of containment boom and more than 10,000???€? of sorbent boom have been deployed in an effort to minimize the spread of the current spill. Much of the observed heavy oil accumulations are concentrated around Racoon Island, but additional marsh islands have observed oil impacts. Multiple wildlife impacts have been reported. A total of 12 birds were captured and returned to the wildlife rehabilitation center. There were probably a greater number of birds impacted, but the approaching weather combined with logistical problems limited the number of recovery teams and the recovery efforts. The expected high winds and cold weather conditions will significant limit any wildlife recovery efforts for the next two days. The approaching high wind and sea state conditions may defeat much of this effort. Overflight are planned to assess oil transport, delineate the special distribution of spilled oil, and develop a response strategy to be implemented when field conditions allow. This process is being described as an aerial SCAT survey, and will be followed up by a ground truth survey when the winds slacken. The NOAA SSC has consulted with USFWS as to their field surveys to enhance the planned SCAT strategy. In addition, NOAA participated in an evening overflight with the RP???€?s environmental representative and the USCG. Pictures from this overflight, taken by the NOAA biologist on-scene are attached. Maps identifying the extent of oiling will be provided after Friday???€?s aerial surveys. The NOAA Scientific Support Team will remain on-scene providing scientific support. The planned SCAT activities will aid in developing a continued response strategy and document oil observations. [SEP] Pipeline site photo from USCG [SEP] The attached pictures were taken during an evening overflight of the spill site. [SEP] Pipeline site photo from USCG [SEP] PIPELINE SPILL, BARATARIA BAY, LOUISIANA 0900 CST, Sunday December 7, 2003 Sunset (12/07): 1701 Sunrise (12/08):0642 Sunset (12/08): 1702 Current Observation (Grand Isle 0900 CST): winds from the north at 9 knots gusting to 11 knots _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the E-NE at 5-10 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, E-SE winds at less than 10 knots are predicted. Monday, south winds at less than 10 knots are forecast to increase to 15 knots by the evening hours. _____________________________________ Waves (in the Bay): Today, choppy seas are expected to become light chop by the afternoon hours. Tonight through Monday, light choppy seas are predicted. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Monday, no precipitation is forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly to mostly cloudy skies are expected. Tonight, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Monday, partly to mostly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be 7+ miles. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the upper 50's to lows in the 40's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the south at 20 knots increasing to 20-25 knots by the evening hours. Seas choppy. Mostly cloudy skies. Afternoon scattered showers and thunderstorms. Wednesday, NW winds at 20-25 knots are predicted to shift and be from the north at 20-25 knots by the evening hours. Seas rough. Mostly cloudy skies. Morning scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday, NE winds at 15-20 knots are forecast. Seas rough. Partly cloudy skies clearing by the afternoon hours. Dry. [SEP] PIPELINE SPILL, BARATARIA BAY, LOUISIANA (UPDATE) 1210 CST, Thursday December 4, 2003 Sunset (12/04): 1701 Sunrise (12/05):0640 Sunset (12/05): 1701 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be variable at less than 10 knots shifting to be from the NW at 10-15 knots by sunset (approximately 1700-1800 CST). Tonight, at approximately 2200 CST the winds are predicted to be from the north at 15-20 knots. Friday, from midnight to noon CST, north winds at 20-25 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Waves (in the Bay): Today, smooth seas are expected to diminish to light chop by sunset. Tonight, light choppy seas are predicted to become rough by 2200 CST. Friday through Friday night, rough seas are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Friday, no precipitation is expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, fog is predicted to lift to partly cloudy skies by 1300-1400 CST. Tonight through Friday night, mostly clear skies. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted except during times of fog. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 70's to lows in the 40's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the north at 20-25 knots. Seas rough. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Temperatures with highs in the 50???€?s and lows in the 30???€?s.
An unknown quantity of number 6 oil spilled from the vessel ITB Jacksonville in the Mississippi River, nearEmpire, Louisiana, 30 November 2003.  NOAA provided assistance to minimize the environmental impacts from the release. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information on the NOAA response to a spill from the vessel ITB Jacksonville in the Mississippi River, near Empire, Louisiana, 30 November 2003. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
n 21 November 2003, the NOAA SSC was notified of a small mystery spill that stranded an estimated 40 gallons of oil on the bayside of Isle Deniers, LA.  Isle Deniers is a coastal barrier island on the southern edge of Terrebonne Bay.  The SSC followed up this contact with consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife (USFWS) since the area is classified as Piping Plover Critical Habitat.  Several small patches of oil were identified and cleaned by small crews using manual removal by shovels on 22 November. [SEP] Attached are several photographs taken of the mystery spill. All photos were provided by the USCG. [SEP] Attached are several photographs taken of the mystery spill. All photos were provided by the USCG. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information on the NOAA response to a mystery spill near Isle Deniers Louisiana. [SEP] Attached are several photographs taken of the mystery spill. All photos were provided by the USCG. [SEP] Attached are several photographs taken of the mystery spill. All photos were provided by the USCG. [SEP] On 21 November 2003, the NOAA SSC was notified of a small mystery spill that stranded an estimated 40 gallons of oil on the bayside of Isle Deniers, LA. Isle Deniers is a coastal barrier island on the southern edge of Terrebonne Bay. The SSC followed up this contact with consultation with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife (USFWS) since the area is classified as Piping Plover Critical Habitat. Several small patches of oil were identified and cleaned by small crews using manual removal by shovels on 22 November. USFWS assisted in the response on-scene and identified two additional small areas that were also cleaned (NOAA did not respond on-scene). As follow-up, the USCG has asked the NOAA SSC to help consult on any consultations required by the Endangered Species Act and the MOU between USCG, DOI, and DOC. It is my understanding that no plovers were identified during the response effort, and the consultation will be directed at the habitat and cleanup actions. As requested, the SSC will provide whatever follow-up is required.
At 1100 PST on November 19, 2003, a US Coast Guard patrol boat report was received of a dark-colored slick 3nm by 10nm, two miles off Lopez Point, CA.  A subsequent flight by CG helo at 1300hrs located the oil about 15nm north of Pt Lopez, and about 15nm north of the originally reported position.  The oil was described as breaking up into smaller pieces and large tarballs, with associated sheening. [SEP] Situation Update, 20NOV03 On Thursday morning, 20NOV03, OSPR dispatched their fixed-wing aircraft to the vicinity of the slicks to determine their new location and search for oiled wildlife. During the flight, the slicks were not located and there were no signs of oiled wildlife. Additionally, there have been no reports to date of oiled wildlife from this incident, nor of oiled shoreline. Since no oil was observed from this OSPR overflight, the MSO decided not to launch one of their own. It was reported this morning that during yesterday's CG overflight a Data Marker Buoy (DMB) was dropped in the vicinity. Hazmat was told initially that this was the new type of DMB that can be tracked real time by satellite and more accurately follows surface currents. However, after some phone calls to the CG R&D center, it was determined that the DMB dropped yesterday was of the old type, which can only be monitored over a specific radio frequency and requires a CG platform on scene to collect positional data. Since the MSO decided not to deploy any further assets to the area, we were unable to get any positional data from this buoy. The SSC attempted to retrieve more detailed information about the position and original description of the slick from the CG patrol boat, however it was learned that this boat apparently did not log this observation and transcribed the wrong coordinates for the slick, resulting in no useful information for trajectory modeling. The MSO did ask Hazmat if it would be possible to hindcast from the positions obtained during the 19NOV overflight. We discussed potential start locations based on recent winds with them and they determined that since non-tank vessels that transit this region can come within 12nm of the coast, the source could very likely have been one of these transiting vessels. At this point, there is no further support requests from the MSO, but the SSC remains in close contact with them and we have prepared our model if they do request some modeling products. [SEP] LOPEZ POINT, CA 1200 PST, Wednesday November 19, 2003 Sunset (11/19): 1656 Sunrise (11/20): 0648 Sunset (11/20): 1656 36-Hour Forecast Winds: Today, the winds are forecast to be from the N-NW at 10-15 knots. Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 10-15 knots. Thursday, the winds are predicted to be from the NW at 15-20 knots. Precipitation: Today through Thursday, no precipitation is forecast in the region. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Thursday, cloudy skies are predicted. Seas: Today through Thursday, the seas are expected to be 5-7 feet. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the upper 60???€?s to lows in the upper 40???€?s. Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 15-25 knots. Cloudy skies are forecast with a chance of scattered showers. Saturday, the winds are forecast to be from the NW at 15-20 knots. Cloudy skies are expected with a chance of scattered showers. Sunday, the winds are predicted to be from the S at 5-10 knots. [SEP] A new Hotline has been opened for reports of a slick off Lopez Point, CA. [SEP] At 1100 PST on November 19, 2003, the US Coast Guard observed a dark-colored slick two miles off Lopez Point, CA. The slick was 5 to 10 miles long and 2 to 3 miles wide. [SEP] On November 19, 2003 at 1100 local time, USCG observers reported a slick approximately two miles off Lopez Point, California. The report described a slick of dark oil that was 5 to 10 miles long and 2 to 3 miles wide. The latitude and longitude of the slick was unknown. Based on the weather forecast and expected surface currents, a slick starting from Lopez Pt. would likely move south as far as Ragged Pt in the next 24-hours. During this time period, shoreline contact is possible in the area extending from Lopez Pt to Ragged Pt, particularly for beaches exposed to the northwest. [SEP] Situation Update, 19NOV03 This morning around noon, the USCG Marine Safety Office San Francisco Bay contacted NOAA Hazmat for trajectory and weather support for a mystery slick observed off Point Lopez, CA (about 20nm south of Point Sur). This slick was observed by a USCG patrol boat and originally thought to cover an area of about 3nm by 10nm and was described as being "fresh". Crew members on the patrol boat did take a sample of the oil, however they collected and stored the sample in a plastic bottle. NOAA Hazmat contacted the National Weather Service and obtained a detailed forecast for the specific area. Based on the forecasted wind and available current information and the initial reported position of the slick, they produced an initial verbal trajectory (see report in this Hotline) that predicted the slick could move as far south as Ragged Point in the following 24 hrs. Since both the winds and currents in the area were most likely parallel to the coast, shoreline impacts were considered unlikely, but if they did occur would likely impact NW-facing beaches first. The MSO SF requested an overflight with a CG helo and at 1300 the flight got underway with two Pollution Investigators from the MSO onboard. Initial reports from the observers were that the oil was actually present in three smaller slicks of the following approximate areas: 50 x 20 yds, 200 x 500 yds, and 100 x 500 yds. These three slicks were spread out over an area with a northern most point of 36?? 11.6'N, 121?? 52.0'W and with a southern most point at 36?? 00.5'N, 121?? 36.2'W. These positions put the oil about 15nm north of Pt Lopez, and about 15nm north of the originally reported position. The oil was described as breaking up into smaller pieces and large tarballs, with associated sheening. The new, more accurate position of the slicks altered the trajectory somewhat. The new positions showed the slicks to be closer to the edge of the continental shelf. Currents in this shelf break region can often be very complex and difficult to predict. Also, this is the time of year when the currents transitsion from a fall to a winter regime, another feature that predicts instability and difficulty to forecast in the currents of this region. However, since the winds were forecast to continue from the N-NW and stay relatively strong, the overall south-southeasterly trend of the slicks from the initial trajectory forecast was still considered to be the most likely prediction. MSO San Francisco determined from this overflight that the product was unrecoverable, and did not require further trajectory updates from Hazmat. We also recommeded to the MSO that they transfer the oil sample collected earlier from onboard the patrol boat into a glass or non-plastic container as plastics contaminate the sample, making fingerprinting very difficult. Even though this sample did spend some time in contact with plastics and therefore was likely contaminated, we suggested they may still want to have it analysed for some descriptive information, especially given that their plans to send out a sampling team on Friday might prove unable to find the small slicks again. The MSO is making plans to take oil samples from two non-tank vessels that transisted the area within 24hrs prior to the initial slick report sometime Friday when both are expected to arrive in port. California Dept of Fish and Game's Office of Spill Prevention and Response (OSPR) has been engaged as well and has plans to launch their fixed-wing aircraft to perform a wildlife reconnaise and search for the slicks on Friday morning. The NOAA SSC contacted the Region IX RRT DOC representative and provided a full briefing of the spill to date. The RRT Rep was experiencing difficulties accessing ResponseLink, so Hazmat reestablished his account information and ensured his ability to log in. The NOAA SSC also had copies of the weather and trajectory forecasts sent to the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary as they were concerned from the initial reports that they might be at risk from impacts. The NOAA SSC also contacted the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary (MBNMS) and described the Hazmat trajectory and weather forecasts in further detail, and ensured they were receiving regular updates from the MSO.
A well in Louisiana had a blowout and a fire.  NOAA provided weather. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
A 122 foot jack-up barge: Superior Endeavor, grounded. No pollution spill reported. Refloated brought back to docks for repairs [SEP] JACKUP RIG GROUNDING, BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 1000 EDT, Friday October 3, 2003 Sunset (10/03): 1822 Sunrise (10/04): 0644 Sunset (10/04): 1820 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the W-NW at 15-20 knots shifting to be from the SW at 10 knots by the late evening hours. Tonight, south winds at 10 knots are predicted. Saturday, south winds at 10-20 knots are forecast to shift and be from the S-SE at 25-30 knots by the afternoon hours. _________________________ Waves: Today through tonight, the seas are expected to be 1 foot. Saturday, 1-2 foot seas are predicted. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through tonight, dry weather is forecast. Saturday, showers are expected by the afternoon hours. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through tonight, clear skies are predicted. Saturday, partly cloudy to mostly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted except during times or showers. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 50???€?s to lows in the 40???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the west at 15-20 knots decreasing to 10-15 knots by the evening hours. Seas 1 foot. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Monday, W-NW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas 1 foot. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. [SEP] Date: October 3, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Steve Lehmann  FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115  SUBJECT: T/B Superior Endeavor FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Debra Simecek-Beatty, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request we have looked at trajectory implications of the diesel and lube oil from the grounding of the T/B Superior Endeavor. These notes are based on the following information: On October 3, 2003 at 0630 local time, the T/B Superior Endeavor grounded at 42?? 19???€? 22.3???€?N, 70?? 55???€? 07.9???€? W (Brewster Spit off George???€?s Island, Boston Harbor). The vessel is carrying 9, 000 gallons of diesel and 250 gallons of lube oil. At this time, the vessel is not leaking product. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) TRAJECTORY Lighter refined products, such as diesel, typically have very high evaporation and dispersion rates and do not tend to form persistent slicks. When spilled, the oil spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. In the event of a catastrophic release of 9000 gallons of diesel on Brewster Spit off George???€?s Island, the tides and winds will transport the oil. Since the forecast winds are expected to clock around (from WNW to SE) in the next 24-hours and with the movement of the tide, there is a possibility of shoreline contact within a two mile radius of the T/B Superior Endeavor. Under these environmental conditions, we would expect 70 to 80% of the oil to evaporate and disperse within 9 to 12 hours of the initial release. If the sheens should contact the shoreline, the oiling would likely appear as a slight staining, or soot-like bathtub ring. Diesel doesn???€?t usually form a stable emulsion and, as a result, don't result a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Lubricating oils tend to be more persistent in the marine environment. When spilled into the water, they will spread rapidly into a thin slick. They will not evaporate, and they will disperse fairly readily in high-energy conditions. If a lube oil release were to occur in the next 24-hours under the forecast wind conditions, approximately 10 to 25% of the oil would disperse in the first 12- hours of the release. Although lube oil is more persistent, the amount is very small and we would not expect significant concentrations of oil to be transported beyond a 2-mile radius of the grounding site. Shoreline cleanups of this type of product tend to be more involved than that of a diesel spill. [SEP] The jackup barge ???€?Superior Endeavor???€? was refloated at approximately 1745 on Oct. 03. As the tide fell during the day of the 3rd, the vessel extended her jackup ???€?legs???€? to relieve stress on the hull. The vessel refloated at just prior to evening high tide. It is worth noting that while the vessel grounded on the morning high, the evening high tide level was greater by almost a foot. The jackup barge ???€?Superior Endeavor???€? was transported to dry dock in Boston for repairs. Although there was no release of oil, she was holed in the forward ballast tank and lost a quantity of potable water. Her forward jackup leg was also damaged. Case closed. Steve Lehmann NOAA, SSC [SEP] Posted below is an Initial report from Steve Lehmann, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on the grounding of the T/B Superior Endeavor. _______________________________ A 122 foot jack-up barge: Superior Endeavor, associated with the Hub Line natural gas pipeline project, ran aground just off of Georges Island in Boston Harbor. The barge is single hulled and carrying approximately 9,500 gallons of diesel fuel. No release has been reported by on-scene individuals. Location: Lat. 42?? 19???€? 22.3???€? N Long. 070?? 55???€? 07.9???€? W Georges Island is part of The Boston Harbor Islands National Park Area (www.fbhi.org), a partnership of public and private properties managed by the National Park Service. Georges Island is a National Historic Landmark in the form of Fort Warren, a Union coastal fort used as a training camp and Confederate prison. The superintendent of the Boston Harbor Islands National Park Area has been notified. Actions: USCG, MSO Boston has request NOAA scientific support, including trajectory analysis. It has also launched an helicopter overflight.
M/V Kent Reliant runs aground. No pollutions released. Refloated Oct 3 2003. [SEP] M/V KENT RELIANT GROUNDING, ENTRANCE SAN JUAN HARBOR, PR 0700 AST, Monday September 29, 2003 Sunset (09/29): 1816 Sunrise (09/30):0615 Sunset (09/30): 1814 Current Observation (San Juan Airport): winds calm _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 5-6 knots shifting to be from the E-NE at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, NE winds at 10 knots or less are predicted. Tuesday, E-SE winds at 5-6 knots are forecast to shift and be from the E-NE at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Tuesday, the seas are expected to be 3-4 feet with 5-6 foot breaking waves. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tuesday, scattered afternoon showers are predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tuesday, mostly cloudy skies are forecast to lift to partly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted except during times of showers. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday through Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the east at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the NE at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 3-4 feet with 5-6 foot breaking waves. Mostly cloudy skies lifting to partly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Afternoon scattered showers. Friday, the winds are expected to be from the east at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the NE at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 2-3 feet with higher breaking waves. Mostly cloudy skies lifting to partly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Afternoon scattered showers. [SEP] M/V KENT RELIANT GROUNDING, ENTRANCE SAN JUAN HARBOR, PR 0300 AST, Thursday October 2, 2003 Sunrise (10/2): 6:15 AM AST Sunset (10/2): 6:13 PM AST Sunrise (10/3): 6:15 AM AST Sunset (10/3): 6:12 PM AST ___________________________________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today and Friday early morning winds are forecast to be ENE at 6-12 knots. During the day winds are expected to be ENE at 10-15 knots. In the evening winds are expected to decrease to ENE at 6-12 knots. After midnight, winds are forecast to be variable with predominant velocity ESE/SE at 5 knots or less until shortly after dawn. ___________________________________________________________ Waves: Today and Friday waves are forecast to be about 3 feet. ___________________________________________________________ Precipitation: Throughout the forecast period, light overnight showers are forecast between 0200 and 0800 hours. Clear skies from late morning to late afternoon are forecast each day. ___________________________________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Overnight and early morning ceilings are expected to be 1500-2500 with visibility decreasing to less than 5 miles for a short time during showers. Daytime clearing is forecast with no ceiling and visibility 10 -15 miles. ___________________________________________________________ Temperatures: In the area of the grounded vessel, temperatures are expected to range from 79-85 F. ___________________________________________________________ Extended Forecast ???€? Days 3-5: Similar wind patterns are expected Saturday through Monday. Waves are expected to increase to 3-4 feet Saturday, 3-5 feet Sunday and 4-5 feet on Monday. Surf could become significant during this period. [SEP] Attached are a series of pictures taken during the extraction attempt by the NOAA SSC. All pictures are from 28 September 2003. [SEP] Evening Report (1 Oct. 2003) At high tide tomorrow, 2 Oct. 2003, the salver will again attempt to remove the M/V Kent Reliant from a relic reef west of the entrance to San Juan Harbor. This will be the second salvage attempt. In some ways, the vessel is currently is a poorer position than before the first extraction attempt. Currently, the vessel is resting in slightly shallower water and very closer to the exposed rock immediately to the southwest (see the attached chart that was prepared by the RP???€?s environmental consultant). To complicate operations, the high spring tides were Monday and Tuesday; Thursday???€?s tide is expected to be only 1.9 feet. In preparation for the second attempt, approximately 2000 tons of additional cargo has been removed. A proactive, but highly flexible environmental plan is in place. All hope that the operation will be successful. To date there has been no oil pollution. The physical injury caused by the grounding and the first attempted vessel extraction will be fully assessed after the vessel has been removed. Local media interest as to the damage (or potential damage) has been increasing. The NOAA SSC will support environmental protection operations by being a member of the aerial surveillance team. If an oil release is observed, the command and control for environmental protection will be directed from a surveillance helicopter that has direct radio communications with field personnel. During this operation, the SSC in conjunction with the RP???€?s environmental consultant will document the salvage and response activities as well as document wildlife and pollution observations. Dispersants have be evaluated as a contingency and resources have been identified, but their use and potential for effectiveness is limited by the type of oil and the expected oil spill trajectory: the oil will most likely move across a series of breakers and shallow shoals that are not within the preapproval guidelines and within an area that has observed manatees and reported sea turtles. Future plans will be directly determined by the effectiveness of tomorrows salvage operation and whether (or not) there is an oil release. In addition, there will be some follow-up ESA consultations with USFWS and NOAA related to three endangered or threatened species in the area. No direct injuries have been observed, but in the spirit of the MOU between USCG and the trustee agencies, the SSC will provide a follow-up report and informal consultation as directed by the FOSC. Concerns with manatees that have been observed in the area have already been addressed. An update will be posted at the completion of the vessel refloat and extraction operation. The on-scene SSC is currently in the process of preparing a SSC Information Management Report that will be available to the Unified Command and resource trustees upon departure. If the salvage operation fails on high tide tomorrow, the conditions are not expected to improve, as tide level will continue to decrease through this lunar cycle. [SEP] M/V KENT RELIANT GROUNDING, ENTRANCE SAN JUAN HARBOR, PR 0745 AST, Thursday September 25, 2003 Sunset (09/25): 1818 Sunrise (09/26):0614 Sunset (09/26): 1817 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the east at less than 5 knots shifting to be from the NE at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, light and variable winds at predicted. Friday, light and variable winds are forecast to shift and be from the east at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Friday, the seas are expected to be 1-2 feet with an occasional 3 foot wave. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, scattered afternoon showers and isolated thunderstorms are predicted. Tonight through Friday, numerous showers and scattered thunderstorms are forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, sunny skies are expected to diminish to variable cloudiness by the afternoon hours. Tonight, mostly clear skies are predicted to diminish to overcast skies by the late evening hours. Friday, overcast skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted except during times or rain. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 15-20 knots. Seas 3 feet or less. Mostly cloudy skies. Scattered afternoon showers and isolated thunderstorms. Sunday, east winds at 15-20 knots with higher gusts are predicted. Seas 4-5 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Scattered afternoon showers and isolated thunderstorms. Monday, E-NE winds at 15-20 knots are forecast. Seas 4-5 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Scattered afternoon showers and isolated thunderstorms. [SEP] M/V KENT RELIANT GROUNDING, ENTRANCE SAN JUAN HARBOR, PR 0700 AST, Saturday September 27, 2003 Sunset (09/27): 1817 Sunrise (09/28):0614 Sunset (09/28): 1816 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 12 knots shifting to be from the NE at 15 knots with gusts to 20 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, east winds at 10 knots or less are predicted. Sunday, east winds at 15 knots with gusts to 20 knots are forecast to shift and be from the E-NE at 10 knots or less. _____________________________________ Waves: Today through Sunday, the seas are expected to be 3 feet with higher breaking waves. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, mostly dry skies are predicted with afternoon scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms. Tonight through Sunday, isolated showers are forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Sunday, partly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted except during times or rain. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 15 knots with gusts to 20 knots decreasing to 10 knots by the evening hours. Seas 3 feet increasing to
Tug Laine Jones grounded at River Mile 620.8 right descending bank of the Mississippi River, near Phillips County Arkansas and caught fire. The tug carried 60000 gallons of diesel, and the cargo on the nearest its barges included a hazardous material - 1,1,1 trichloroethane aka methyl chloroform. The USCG requested weather, evacuation boundaries, PPE, and the impacts downstream. NOAA HAZMAT provided this information along with CAMEO chemical information. Tug recovered and was moved for repairs. [SEP] TUG FIRE, MISSISSIPPI RIVER, HELENA, ARKANSAS 1000 CDT, Tuesday September 9, 2003 Sunset (09/09): 1917 Sunrise (09/10): 0641 Sunset (09/10): 1916 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-SE at 5-7 knots. Tonight, light and variable winds with a SE component at 3 knots are predicted. Wednesday, SE winds at 12 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, no precipitation is expected throughout this 36 hours forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Tonight, mostly clear skies are forecast. Wednesday, partly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 60???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 10-12 knots. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of afternoon showers. Friday, south winds at 15 knots with gusts to 20 knots are predicted. Mostly cloudy skies. Slight chance of afternoon showers. Saturday, S-SW winds at 15 knots and gusty are forecast. Mostly cloudy skies. Possible showers. _____________________________________ Hydrology Update (Mississippi River - Helena, Arkansas): Currently, the Mississippi river is at 19.4 feet with a flood stage of 44 feet. The surface flow rate is currently at 5.5 feet per second with a mid-depth velocity of 3.5 to 4 feet per second. Date: 9/9 9/10 9/11 9/12 9/13 Gauge(feet) 19.4 20.9 21.5 21.5 21.1 Flow(CFS) 512K 547K 564K 564K 547K [SEP] Methyl chloroform or more frequently called 1,1,1-trichloroethane is a widely used industrial solvent and used in a number of consumer products. It has a moderate toxicity rating of 3 in "Clinical Toxicity of Commercial Products". It primarily acts as a central nervous system depressant at rather high concentrations of above 350ppm. The ERG2 , the level thought to protect the general public, for this material is listed as 700ppm. These levels are difficult to sustain as the vapor pressure at Standard Temperature and Pressure is in the range of 4 mm Hg, which is rather low. Additionally, it is unlikely that enough of the chemical could pool up on a barge if a catastrophic event occurred and the compound was spilled or released from the barge tank. The compound has a density (>1.3) that would cause the material to sink rapidly to the bottom of the river. Travel downstream seeking low areas in the river bottom where it would pool. It's low solubility in water <1ppm dictates that rather low levels are expected to be found in the water column (probably low ppb range because the solubilized trichloroethane will be quickly diluted in the water column). The primary concern for this scenario, the close proximity of a fire to the barge of 1,1,1-trichloroethane, makes the threat of a BLEVE type of explosion a possibilty. The flash point for the compound is >200 deg. F. with explosion limits between 7-12%. The compound being a halogenated hydrocarbon makes it very difficult to ignite in a vapor, in fact this material is similar to many compounds that are routinely used as fire retardents, therefore, it is not a high flammability risk. However, with a fire impinging on a tank, and with that tanks sudden failure, a BLEVE explosion, rupture may result and with it all the collateral damage resulting from an explosive event. This is the reason for the evacuation distance in the ERG being 800 meters(please note this on the faxed sheet). [SEP] TUG FIRE, MISSISSIPPI RIVER, HELENA, ARKANSAS 1100 CDT, Wednesday September 10, 2003 Sunset (09/10): 1916 Sunrise (09/11):0642 Sunset (09/11): 1915 Current Observation (Helena, Arkansas): winds from the SE at 5 knots _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5-10 knots. Tonight, SE winds at 4-8 knots are predicted. Thursday, SE winds at 5 knots are forecast to increase to 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Thursday night, SE winds at 4-8 knots are predicted. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through tonight, dry weather is expected. Thursday, very slight chance of afternoon showers are predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Tonight, mostly clear skies are expected. Thursday, partly cloudy skies are predicted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 60???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are expected to be from the south at 10 knots decreasing to 5- 10 knots by the evening hours. Partly cloudy skies diminishing to mostly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Saturday, south winds at 10-15 knots are predicted to become variable at 5-10 knots by the evening hours. Mostly cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Sunday, north winds at 5 knots during the morning hours are forecast to increase to 10 knots by the afternoon hours. Mostly cloudy skies lifting to partly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Chance of showers diminishing during the afternoon hours. _____________________________________ Hydrology Update (Mississippi River - Helena, Arkansas): Currently, the Mississippi river is at 20.7 feet with a flood stage of 44 feet. The surface flow rate is currently at 5.5 feet per second with a mid-depth velocity of 3.5 ???€? 4 feet per second. Date: 9/10 9/11 9/12 9/13 9/14 Gauge(feet) 20.7 21.2 21.2 20.9 20.4 Flow(CFS) 547K 560K 560K 547K 540K [SEP] The M/V Lainey Jones will be moved to Greenville MS for repairs. The operation will start at 1000 hrs CST, and the vessel will be alongside by sunset this evening. No further assistance is required at this time. [SEP] TUG FIRE, MISSISSIPPI RIVER, HELENA, ARKANSAS 1030 CDT, Monday September 8, 2003 Sunset (09/08): 1919 Sunrise (09/09): 0641 Sunset (09/09): 1917 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the E-NE at 5-7 knots. Tonight, east winds at less than 5 knots are predicted. Tuesday, SE winds at 5-7 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Tuesday, no precipitation is expected throughout this 36 hours forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Tonight, mostly clear skies are forecast. Tuesday, partly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Inversion Height: Today, the inversion height is forecast to be 9,400 feet. Tonight, an inversion height of 1,000 feet is expected. Tuesday, an inversion height of 8,600 feet is predicted. _____________________________________ Stability Class: Today, the stability class is forecast to be well mixed (class: A). Tonight, calm air is expected (class: F). Tuesday, moderately mixed air is predicted (class: B). _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 60???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the south at 5-10 knots by the afternoon hours. Mostly cloudy skies. Possible afternoon and evening isolated showers. Thursday, south winds at 10 knots are predicted to increase to 15 knots by the afternoon hours. Mostly cloudy skies. Possible afternoon and evening isolated showers. Friday, south winds at 15 knots and gusty are forecast. Mostly cloudy skies. _____________________________________ Hydrology Update (Helena, Arkansas): Currently, the Mississippi river is at 16.6 feet with a flood stage of 44 feet. The surface flow rate is currently at 5.5 feet per second with a mid-depth velocity of 3.5 to 4 feet per second. Date: 9/8 9/9 9/10 9/11 9/12 Gauge(feet) 16/6 19.5 21.0 21.7 22.0 Flow(CFS) 428K 512K 547K 564K 571K [SEP] Posted below is an initial report from Richard Wingrove, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on the grounding and fire aboard the tug Laine Jones on the Mississippi River, near Phillips County Arkansas. _______________________________ On Sept. 08, 2003, the NOAA SSC for the Western Rivers, was contacted by MSO Memphis about a tug aflame. The M/V LAINE JONES was aground at River Mile 620.8 right descending bank of the Mississippi River, near Phillips County Arkansas. The fire was contained to the stern of the boat. The tug was carrying 60,000 gallons of diesel oil aboard. Twenty-four barges were being pushed by the tug at the time of the incident. Of these only one contained a hazardous material - 1,1,1 trichloroethane aka methyl chloroform. The barge was the outermost one closest to the tug. Concerns were raised from the USCG about the effects of the material if it was released or burned. No information was available on the volume of the cargo. The USCG requested weather, evacuation boundaries, PPE, and the impacts downstream. NOAA HAZMAT provided this information along with CAMEO chemical information. A follow-up call to the USCG
The vessel was carrying 52,000 tons of petroleum coke.  The SSC initially provided a brief hazard characterization of the cargo to aid the USCG responders in assessing the potential environmental concerns. On 5September, the MSO Port Arthur requested an oil spill trajectory tofurther assess potential environmental concerns. This operation was completed by 9 September.  NOAA was also asked to provide a side-scan sonar survey given that a team was already in the area. [SEP] Posted below is an initial report from Charlie Henry, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on the grounding of the M/V Peljesac near the Sabine Jetties. _______________________________ Initial Report On Sunday, 31 August 2003, the NOAA SSC was notified of a grounded freighter, M/V Peljesac, near the Sabine Jetties. The bow of the vessel was reported aground on soft sediments. The vessel was carrying 52,000 tons of petroleum coke. The SSC initially provided a brief hazard characterization of the cargo to aid the USCG responders in assessing the potential environmental concerns. This information is attached below. Initial response efforts failed free the vessel. On 5 September, the MSO Port Arthur requested an oil spill trajectory to further assess potential environmental concerns (the trajectory and weather are provided as separate documents). To reduce the potential of a heavy fuel oil spill impacting sensitive habitat some four miles NNW of the grounding site, the USCG directed the vessel owner to lighter the bulk of the heavy fuel oil and retain only enough diesel fuel to maintain operations. This operation was completed by 9 September. NOAA was also asked to provide a side-scan sonar survey given that a team was already in the area. At present, the plan is to off-load some 22,000 tons of coke using clam-shell buckets into open barges in an effort to remove the vessel from it???€?s current position. Since each barge is capable of holding approximately 1000 tons of product and the removal rate may be as slow as 1 barge load per day, this operation may take some time. Additional updates will follow. Additional Background: The freighter was reported aground near the Sabine Jetties. The cargo was reported as 52,000 tons of Petroleum Coke. Coke is classified as a nonhazardous material. Petroleum Coke is a residual product yielded during the refinery cracking process. While a residual waste product in crude oil refining, coke is used in various high temperature metal processing industries. It is generally a black fine powder to lumpy material. The product is insoluble in water, should not sheen (any sheening would be minor), and is only considered an inhalation occupational risk, as the fine particulates would be a minor irritant hazard. If the hold is breached, the material could be lost to the sea. Based on the reported bulk density (45-55 lb/ft3) most of it should float, but I believe much of the product would sink since the true specific gravity is probably greater seawater. What product that escapes a damaged hold would either sink, float, or be suspended in the water column. A combination of the three is likely with the larger lumps sinking and the finer particles suspended and floating. Brief Hazard Characterization: The environmental risk of the coke is minor (it is defined as a nonhazardous material). The suspended particles would present a minor risk to aquatic animals, but not from direct toxicity, but rather as suspended particulates or smothering effects. Any large accumulations of coke stranded on public use beaches should be removed. Whether any effort would be required to recover the sunken portion of the product, is impossible to predict at present (such a discussion would require input from various natural resource trustees). Based on the information provided, the greater environmental threat is the 200 tons of diesel and 1200 tons of heavy fuel oil on board. Given the on-shore winds from the passing tropical storm and the predicted higher than normal tides, the fuel oils would present a far greater hazard to coastal resources than the coke product. With the higher than normal water conditions, the fuel oils could be transported into much of the protected backmarsh habitat by overwashing. [SEP] Trajectory [SEP] Mid-Valley Pipeline, Kentucky River, Carrollton, KY 0200 CST, Monday January 31, 2005 This is a site specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunrise (1/31): 0645 CST Sunset (1/31): 1702 Sunrise (2/1): 0644 Sunset (2/1): 1703  36 Hour Forecast Winds: Winds are forecast to be from the NE at 5 mph through Tuesday night. Precipitation: Dry weather is predicted through the forecast period. Ceiling: Clouds are expected to clear early Monday morning, with some fog around daybreak. Skies are expected to improve to partly cloudy during the day with ceilings raising to 8,000 - 10,000 feet by Monday night. On Tuesday, early morning fog at daybreak is predicted, clearing quickly to mostly sunny skies. Visibility: Monday morning visibility is expected to be 1-3 miles clearing to unlimited during the day. With the fog early Tuesday morning, visibility may drop to 4-5 miles, clearing to unlimited as the fog clears. Temperatures: High Monday is expected to be upper 30s F; low Monday night around 20 F. High Tuesday is expected to be upper 30s F; low Tuesday night around 20 F. Extended Forecast ???€? Days 3-5: Dry conditions with partly cloudy to partly sunny skies are expected through mid-week.
T/V Great Lakes grounded on soft sediment. No pollution released. The vessel was refloated that same day. [SEP] A new Hotline has been opened for reports on the T/V Great Lakes on the Hudson River in New York. [SEP] T/V GREAT LAKES GROUNDING, HUDSON RIVER, ALBANY NY 1130 EDT, Tuesday August 26, 2003 Sunset (08/26): 1940 Sunrise (08/27): 0614 Sunset (08/27): 1938 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the south at 5 knots. Tonight, south winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Wednesday, W-NW winds at 15-20 knots with higher gusts are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, dry weather is expected to diminish to possible showers by the late afternoon hours. Tonight, scattered showers and thunderstorms are predicted. Wednesday, no precipitation is forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, partly cloudy skies are expected to diminish to mostly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Tonight, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Wednesday, mostly cloudy skies are forecast to lift to partly cloudy skies by the morning hours. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted except during times of showers. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 60???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 5 knots. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Friday, south winds at 10-20 knots are predicted. Mostly cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Saturday, N-NW winds are forecast. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. _____________________________________ Hydrology (Troy ? Green Island): The current flow of the Hudson river is approximately 4,920 CFS. This is considered below normal for this time of year. The flow rate of the Hudson river at the incident site is predicted to be tidally dominated. [SEP] Attached is the tide chart for Albany for today and tomorrow. It shows that at about 0750 today the tide was about +2.5 feet. At 1706 this afternoon it should be about +3.9 feet. Hopefully this will be enough to enable the tugs to yank her off. If not, the next high tide should work at 0522 tomorrow morning it will be +5.2 feet. The currents in that area of the river are all down stream, despite the fact that there is about a 5.5 foot tidal range. The current runs about 0.3 knots. So, over a tidal cycle of 12 hours any released product could travel between 3 to 4 miles down river (depending on wind conditions). Winds this afternoon are expected to be from the south at 5 knots, tonight from the S about 10-15 knots, tomorrow from the W - NW about 15 - 20 knots and gusty. Showers are possible this afternoon and thunderstorms tonight. Wednesday it should be dry. Just a heads up, if there is a release of jet fuel the biggest threat would be any product collecting under pier, docks, etc. This could cause a highly flammable atmosphere (but you already knew that). Flushing would be the best response option. The jet fuel, if released in sufficient quantity, could cause a significant fishkill and also kill any river bank vegetation. If I get any additional data to help you I'll pass it along. If you need anything else from me, please do not hesitate to call or page. ED "Semper Flexibilus" [SEP] The TV Great Lakes was successfully removed from its grounded state at approximately 2030 Tuesday (8/26) and moved to a pier for further inspection and lightering. No pollution was seen coming from the vessel. [SEP] The T/V Great Lakes ran aground at 0750am south of Albany, New York on the Hudson River. The ship is carrying 35,000 barrels of jet fuel. It is aground on a soft bottom at 42 35.06N and 73 45.34 W.
On Wednesday, August 20, 2003, it was reported to Coast Guard MSOAnchorage that the F/V Donna Ann, a 50' wooden-hulled boat built in1947,  ran aground after dragging anchor in gale force winds from theNW.  The vessel was anchored in Tanglefoot Bay adjacent the community ofKarluk on the west side of Kodiak Island.   The vessel had 1000 gallonsof diesel and finally came to rest at position N57-34.4, W154-29.4 wherean on-scene observer reported surf crashing through the wheelhouse.Planned CG helo overflight for August 21 was canceled due to the helomechanical problems.  Instead the CG opened up the Liability Trust Fundand hired a fixed wing Beaver to fly from Kodiak and assess thesituation, the report from which won't be available until the morning ofAugust 22.   NOAA has provided support with weather and resources atrisk information.  By Thursday night, Aug. 21, the NW winds are expectedto drop to 5-15 kts, and by late Friday the wind should shift around tothe SW at 10-15 kts.   The grounding site is about one-half mile east ofCape Karluk, the site of a seabird rookery and about one mile west ofthe village of Karluk and the Karluk Lagoon which supports salmon runsMay through November.   The Lagoon is also the site of sea ducks,occasional sea otters, and occasional brown bear activity.PolRep 2 and final: Joint Coast Guard/ADEC team flew to Karluk on Thursday afternoon,August 21, and were able to board the F/V Donna Ann.  The wheelhouse hadbeen separated from the hull as a result of the prolonged beating by theheavy surf and the old wooden hull was in pretty bad shape.  It wasdetermined that all the diesel had been purged from the tanks and beendispersed in the large and turbulent seas. [SEP] Posted below is a report from John Whitney, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on the August 20, 2003, grounding of the F/V Donna Ann in Tanglefoot Bay, Kodiak Island, Alaska. _______________________________ PolRep 1: On Wednesday, August 20, 2003, it was reported to Coast Guard MSO Anchorage that the F/V Donna Ann, a 50???€? wooden-hulled boat built in 1947, ran aground after dragging anchor in gale force winds from the NW. The vessel was anchored in Tanglefoot Bay adjacent the community of Karluk on the west side of Kodiak Island. The vessel had 1000 gallons of diesel and finally came to rest at position N57-34.4, W154-29.4 where an on-scene observer reported surf crashing through the wheelhouse. Planned CG helo overflight for August 21 was canceled due to the helo mechanical problems. Instead the CG opened up the Liability Trust Fund and hired a fixed wing Beaver to fly from Kodiak and assess the situation, the report from which won???€?t be available until the morning of August 22. NOAA has provided support with weather and resources at risk information. By Thursday night, Aug. 21, the NW winds are expected to drop to 5-15 kts, and by late Friday the wind should shift around to the SW at 10-15 kts. The grounding site is about one-half mile east of Cape Karluk, the site of a seabird rookery and about one mile west of the village of Karluk and the Karluk Lagoon which supports salmon runs May through November. The Lagoon is also the site of sea ducks, occasional sea otters, and occasional brown bear activity. PolRep 2 and final: Joint Coast Guard/ADEC team flew to Karluk on Thursday afternoon, August 21, and were able to board the F/V Donna Ann. The wheelhouse had been separated from the hull as a result of the prolonged beating by the heavy surf and the old wooden hull was in pretty bad shape. It was determined that all the diesel had been purged from the tanks and been dispersed in the large and turbulent seas. Case closed.
On August 19, 2003, it was reported to Coast Guard MSO Valdez that theskipper of the 54' long F/V Valiant Maid, hit a submerged rock and capsized in 45 feet of water on the NW side of Spike Island just offshore from the town of Cordova in Prince William Sound.   The location of the sunken vessel was N60-33.0, W145-46.3, and it went down with an estimated 500 gallons of diesel in an area of very strong tidal currents.  A long oil slick was noted on the surface, and it was believed that this was just the fuel emanating from the vents and that the two fuel tanks were intact.   Trying to beat some forecast heavy winds for the night of August 19, the owner immediately hired divers to plug the vents.  In so doing the divers noted that the starboard tank was empty of an estimated 200 gallons of diesel.   The next day, when the strong winds never materialized, divers again descended to the vessel to attempt to pump out the port fuel tank, but found it empty also.   Apparently all the fuel  had escaped the first day and been rapidly dispersed by the strong tidal currents, and there was probably less than 500 gallons of diesel on the vessel when in sank.  NOAA provided support to the CG with weather, tidal and resources at risk information.   Several sea otters and seabirds were in the vicinity, but a wildlife observer from the local Eyak native community noted no abnormal behavior. [SEP] Posted below is a report from John Whitney, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on the August 19, 2003, sinking of the F/V Valiant Maid offshore Cordova, Alaska. _______________________________ PolRep I and Final: F/V Valiant Maid On August 19, 2003, it was reported to Coast Guard MSO Valdez that the skipper of the F/V Valiant Maid, 54 ???€? long, fell asleep at the wheel, hit a submerged rock and capsized in 45 feet of water on the NW side of Spike Island just offshore from the town of Cordova in Prince William Sound. The location of the sunken vessel was N60-33.0, W145-46.3, and it went down with an estimated 500 gallons of diesel in an area of very strong tidal currents. A long oil slick was noted on the surface, and it was believed that this was just the fuel emanating from the vents and that the two fuel tanks were intact. Trying to beat some forecast heavy winds for the night of August 19, the owner immediately hired divers to plug the vents. In so doing the divers noted that the starboard tank was empty of an estimated 200 gallons of diesel. The next day, when the strong winds never materialized, divers again descended to the vessel to attempt to pump out the port fuel tank, but found it empty also. Apparently all the fuel had escaped the first day and been rapidly dispersed by the strong tidal currents, and there was probably less than 500 gallons of diesel on the vessel when in sank. NOAA provided support to the CG with weather, tidal and resources at risk information. Several sea otters and seabirds were in the vicinity, but a wildlife observer from the local Eyak native community noted no abnormal behavior. [SEP] On August 19, 2003, it was reported to Coast Guard MSO Valdez that the skipper of the F/V Valiant Maid, 54' long, fell asleep at the wheel, hit a submerged rock and capsized in 45 feet of water on the NW side of Spike Island just offshore from the town of Cordova in Prince William Sound. The location of the sunken vessel was N60-33.0, W145-46.3, and it went down with an estimated 500 gallons of diesel in an area of very strong tidal currents. A long oil slick was noted on the surface, and it was believed that this was just the fuel emanating from the vents and that the two fuel tanks were intact. Trying to beat some forecast heavy winds for the night of August 19, the owner immediately hired divers to plug the vents. In so doing the divers noted that the starboard tank was empty of an estimated 200 gallons of diesel. The next day, when the strong winds never materialized, divers again descended to the vessel to attempt to pump out the port fuel tank, but found it empty also. Apparently all the fuel had escaped the first day and been rapidly dispersed by the strong tidal currents, and there was probably less than 500 gallons of diesel on the vessel when in sank. NOAA provided support to the CG with weather, tidal and resources at risk information. Several sea otters and seabirds were in the vicinity, but a wildlife observer from the local Eyak native community noted no abnormal behavior.
During the afternoon of 18 August 2003, the NOAA Scientific SupportCoordinator was notified by USCG MSU Galveston of a mystery slick offthe Texas Coast.  The slick was reported as "chocolate mousse-like" andextending some 5 miles with an approximate location of 29 deg 05 min N Lat.094 deg 36.4 min W Long., some 15 miles off the Texas coast.  Although theUSCG didn't suggest a possible source, the description of the slick andthe proximity to the vessel traffic lanes are consistent with a shiptransiting the area and pumping bilge.  The USCG requested trajectoryassistance.  A follow-up overflight, on the evening of 18 August bytraining observers, defined the mystery slick as being a debris linecomposed primarily of Sargasso weed.  No additional response actionswere required. [SEP] Posted below is a report from Charlie Henry, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on a Mystery Slick off Galveston Jetties, TX. _______________________________ Mystery Slick off Galveston Jetties Initial and Final report (19 August 2003) During the afternoon of 18 August 2003, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by USCG MSU Galveston of a mystery slick off the Texas Coast. The slick was reported as ???€?chocolate mousse-like???€? and extending some 5 miles with an approximate location of 29?? 05???€? N Lat. 094?? 36.4???€? W Long., some 15 miles off the Texas coast. Although the USCG didn???€?t suggest a possible source, the description of the slick and the proximity to the vessel traffic lanes are consistent with a ship transiting the area and pumping bilge. The USCG requested trajectory assistance. This time of the year, the surface current generally flows up coast (to the east). However, observations from the TABS array indicate the currents are weak and probably inertial (variable). The NWS predicted weak WSW winds becoming WNW but still weak on 19 August. With the weak winds and currents, it is likely the oil (or mystery substance) would remain a cohesive slick and stay offshore for the next 36-hours. Shoreline contact is possible late Wednesday (20 August) or early Thursday due to forecast southerly winds. Bottom line, the follow-up overflight, on the evening of 18 August by training observers, defined the mystery slick as being a debris line composed primarily of Sargasso weed. No additional response actions were required.
On Thursday afternoon, August 7, 2003, the Coast Guard was notified that the F/V Chichagof, an 81 foot wooden-hulled fishing tender, grounded in Alitak Bay, Kodiak Island with 15,000 gallons of diesel.   The vessel operator hit a rock, after which he intentionally grounded the vessel at position, 55-53.6N, 155-13.4W.  The grounding resulted in damage to the vessel's bow area, and the fuel tanks were not compromised during the incident.  Nevertheless, it was taking on water.  A Good Samaritan vessel delivered a pump to the F/V Chichagof, but that was unable to keep up with the flooding.   Not until a Coast Guard helo from station Kodiak delivered two additional pumps was the vessel able to control the flooding.  The next morning a welder and marine surveyor were on scene to assess  and repair the damaged bow with a patch over the roughly 1 foot X 1 foot hole.   By Saturday, August 9, the vessel was fully repaired and back fishing.  NOAA supported the Coast Guard in dealing with this incidence by providing detailed weather information and forecasts, tidal data, and resources at risk information. [SEP] On Thursday afternoon, August 7, 2003, the Coast Guard was notified that the F/V Chichagof, an 81 foot wooden-hulled fishing tender, grounded in Alitak Bay, Kodiak Island with 15,000 gallons of diesel. The vessel operator stated to the Coast Guard that he fell asleep and hit a rock, after which he intentionally grounded the vessel at position, 55-53.6N, 155-13.4W. The grounding resulted in damage to the vessel's bow area, and the fuel tanks were not compromised during the incident. Nevertheless, it was taking on water. A Good Samaritan vessel delivered a pump to the F/V Chichagof, but that was unable to keep up with the flooding. Not until a Coast Guard helo from station Kodiak deliver ed to additional pumps was the vessel able to control the flooding. The next mo rning a welder and marine survey were on scene to assess and repair the damaged bow with a batch over the roughly 1 foot X 1 foot hole. By Saturday, August 9 , the vessel was fully repaired and back fishing. NOAA supported the Coast Guard in dealing with this incidence by providing detailed weather information and forecasts, tidal data, and resources at risk information. [SEP] Posted below is a report from John Whitney, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on the August 7, 2003, grounding of the F/V Chichagof in Alitak Bay, Kodiak Island, Alaska. _______________________________ Initial and Final Report: F/V Chichagof, Southern Kodiak Island On Thursday afternoon, August 7, 2003, the Coast Guard was notified that the F/V Chichagof, an 81 foot wooden-hulled fishing tender, grounded in Alitak Bay, Kodiak Island with 15,000 gallons of diesel. The vessel operator stated to the Coast Guard that he fell asleep and hit a rock, after which he intentionally grounded the vessel at position, 55-53.6N, 155-13.4W. The grounding resulted in damage to the vessel???€?s bow area, and the fuel tanks were not compromised during the incident. Nevertheless, it was taking on water. A Good Samaritan vessel delivered a pump to the F/V Chichagof, but that was unable to keep up with the flooding. Not until a Coast Guard helo from station Kodiak delivered to additional pumps was the vessel able to control the flooding. The next morning a welder and marine survey were on scene to assess and repair the damaged bow with a batch over the roughly 1 foot X 1 foot hole. By Saturday, August 9, the vessel was fully repaired and back fishing. NOAA supported the Coast Guard in dealing with this incidence by providing detailed weather information and forecasts, tidal data, and resources at risk information.
At approximately 1330 August 5, 2003, NOAA Hazmat received a call fromWashington State Department of Ecology, requesting assistance for adiesel spill which had occurred at the mouth of the Willamette Riverwhere it entered the Columbia River at mile marker 101.  A vessel hadstruck a 1500 gallon fuel tank on a dock releasing an estimated 750gallons.  NOAA verbally provided oil fate and trajectory information toassist in determining the distance the spill could travel.No further assistance was requested [SEP] Posted below is a report capturing information on the NOAA response to a small diesel spill on the Columbia River, near Portland Oregon August 5, 2003. _______________________________ At approximately 1330 August 5, 2003, NOAA Hazmat received a call from Washington State Department of Ecology, requesting assistance for a diesel spill which had occurred at the mouth of the Willamette River where it entered the Columbia River at mile marker 101. A vessel had struck a 1500 gallon fuel tank on a dock releasing an estimated 750 gallons. NOAA verbally provided oil fate and trajectory information to assist in determining the distance the spill could travel. No further assistance was requested
M/V Alam Senang grounded. Was refloated the next night. No signifcant damages done to the hull and no oil released. [SEP] Based on information from NOAA DAC, the vessel has #6 aboard, not #2. This has not been verified with USCG yet, but here is the ADIOS output for #6. Oil Name = FUEL OIL NO.6 API = 12.3 Pour Point = 59 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 10 knots Wave Height = 3 ft Water Temperature = 80 deg F Total Amount of Oil Released = 5,000 metric tonnes (160,000 gallons) ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill metric ton percent percent percent 1 5,000 - 0 - 0 - 100 2 5,000 0 0 100 4 5,000 - 1 - 0 - 99 8 5,000 2 0 98 12 5,000 - 3 - 1 - 96 16 5,000 4 1 95 20 5,000 - 4 - 2 - 94 24 5,000 5 3 92 30 5,000 - 5 - 4 - 90 36 5,000 6 6 88 42 5,000 - 6 - 7 - 86 48 5,000 7 9 85 54 5,000 - 7 - 10 - 83 60 5,000 7 11 82 66 5,000 - 7 - 13 - 80 72 5,000 7 14 79 78 5,000 - 8 - 15 - 78 84 5,000 8 16 77 90 5,000 - 8 - 17 - 76 96 5,000 8 18 74 102 5,000 - 8 - 19 - 73 108 5,000 8 19 73 114 5,000 - 8 - 20 - 72 120 5,000 8 21 71 [SEP] Date: 1700 EDT June 26, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential Fuel Oil #6 spill from M/V Alam Senang off Port Everglades. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The M/V Alam Senang, a 584' vessel, is aground about 1.5 miles off Port Everglades. The approximate location is reported as 26?? 06' N by 080?? 05' W. No oil has been leaked. The vessel has no apparent damage and is sitting on a soft bottom. NOAA Damage Assessment reports that the ship has between 400 and 500 metric tons of #6 fuel oil onboard. This translates to 130,000 to 160,000 gallons. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds are expected to be from the SE at 10 - 15 knots this afternoon, becoming SE at 5 - 10 knots tonight. On Friday winds are expected to be in the 5 - 10 knot range from the SE. 2) TRAJECTORY The location of vessel is close to the inshore edge of the Gulf Stream. This along with the SE winds over the next few days will cause any oil spill to move to the NNW. If 160,000 gallons of #6 were to spill over a few hours under these conditions we would expect a slick which could extend from the vessel to the NNW for about 10 - 12 miles. Patches of sheen and dark oil could extend for an additional 5 - 10 miles to the north over the next 24 hours. The most probable areas of first impact would be along he outer coast between Ft. Lauderdale and Hillsboro Inlet within 5 - 7 hours from the first oil being lost. 3) OIL FATE Heavy refined products, such as Fuel Oil No. 6 and Bunker C, have been refined to remove the lighter components and as a result are somewhat pre- weathered. As a result they are usually persistent floating pollutant problems. These oils can occasionally form a mousse, but usually only slowly, and after a period of days. Fuel Oil No. 6 and Bunker C often will not spread into thin films, instead they often break up into smaller patches and then tarballs. The resulting scattered tarballs are very difficult to observe using visual, or remote sensing techniques. This combined with the persistence of the tarballs makes these kinds of spills likely to result in long range, and occasionally unexpected, beach impacts. [SEP] Tidal heights at Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, Anglin Fishing Pier, East Coast Station No. 3705 Latitude: 26??11.30' Longitude: 080??05.60' Time offsets Hour:Min High Water -00:11 Low Water -00:09 High water height difference: (*1.06+0.00) Low water height difference : (*1.12+0.00) Based on Miami Harbor Entrance From Thu 06/26/2003 to Mon 06/30/2003 Local Daylight Savings Time Date Time Height(ft) Description ------------------------------------------------------- 06/26/2003 00:29 + 0.5 Low Thu 06:18 + 2.3 High 12:39 - 0.0 Low 19:07 + 2.6 High ------------------------------------------------------- 06/27/2003 01:12 + 0.5 Low Fri 07:00 + 2.4 High 13:20 - 0.1 Low 19:47 + 2.7 High ------------------------------------------------------- 06/28/2003 01:54 + 0.4 Low Sat 07:40 + 2.4 High 13:59 - 0.2 Low 20:27 + 2.7 High ------------------------------------------------------- 06/29/2003 02:34 + 0.4 Low Sun 08:20 + 2.4 High 14:39 - 0.2 Low 21:06 + 2.8 High ------------------------------------------------------- 06/30/2003 03:13 + 0.3 Low Mon 09:01 + 2.5 High 15:19 - 0.2 Low 21:45 + 2.8 High [SEP] Date: 1030 EDT June 26, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential diesel spill from M/V Alam Senang off Port Everglades. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: The M/V Alam Senang, a 584' vessel, is aground about 1.5 miles off Port Everglades. The approximate location is reported as 26?? 06' N by 080?? 05' W. No oil has been leaked. The vessel has no apparent damage and is sitting on a soft bottom. It has between 400 and 500 metric tons of #2 fuel oil onboard. This translates to 130,000 to 160,000 gallons. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Winds are expected to be from the SE at 10 - 15 knots today, becoming SE at 5 - 10 knots tonight. 2) TRAJECTORY The location of vessel is close to the inshore edge of the Gulf Stream. This along with the SE winds over the next few days will cause any oil spill to move to the NNW. If 160,000 gallons of #2 were to spill over a few hours under these conditions we would expect a visible sheen which could extend from the vessel to the NNW for about 10 - 12 miles. A bathtub ring type beach staining should be expected to the NNW of the vessel within 4 - 6 hrs after the spill. The most probable areas of impact would be along the outer coast between Ft. Lauderdale and Hillsboro Inlet. 3) OIL FATE Lighter refined products, such as diesel, typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring (in the case of diesel) is common. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. Note that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic then heavier oils. Therefore these oils may not present an involved cleanup problem, however they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat problem in low energy marine environments. [SEP] Attached photos of the grounded vessel from Ft Lauderdale Beach. Brad Benggio, NOAA SSC [SEP] Attached photos of the grounded vessel from Ft Lauderdale Beach. Brad Benggio, NOAA SSC [SEP] M/V Alam Senang Updated INFO Excerpt from NOAA DAC message, J.Jeansonne 6/26/2003 "Fuel on board is #6 - Bunker C, not #2. This makes more sense for such a large ship. No spill, and no hull damage noted during the diver hull inspection. (Low probability of spill) Weather is mild. Location is N26deg 08.8', W80deg 05.0' by GPS. (Where on the ship that is taken is unknown. Depth at grounding is 31' Inbound speed was 4kts, heading unknown at this time. Bottom type reported variously as hard bottom with hard/soft corals or sand. I suspect that it is both. That area commonly has limestone rock (relict coral) reefs with various types of hard and soft corals, sponges, and macroalgae growth. Significance of physical injury will relate to the density and species present. Salvage plan: Another attempt to pull it
Pipeline failure due to corrosion. Clean-up assessment underway. The contamination appears to be confined to a shallow, narrow depression and extends some 1,200 feet in length. [SEP] Photos from 24 July 2003, field assessment. [SEP] Photos from 24 July 2003, field assessment. [SEP] Photos from 24 July 2003, field assessment. [SEP] Photos from 24 July 2003, field assessment. [SEP] Posted below is the initial report from Charlie Henry, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on the Pipeline Spill, near Belle Isle LA _______________________________ Initial Report On the evening of 22 July 2003, the NOAA SSC was notified of an oil spill near Belle Isle, Louisiana. Belle Isle is marsh area near Atchafalaya Bay. An estimated 50 to 100 bbls of light crude oil was released due to a pipeline failure. Most of the oil is contained in a pipeline ditch surrounded by freshwater marsh on each side. The RP has proposed in-situ burning as a response option. The SSC, in support of the USCG, will visit the site in the morning to assess response options. [SEP] Photos from 24 July 2003, field assessment.
The observed oil (or sheen) was observed less than five miles from the coast west of Marsh Island.  A follow-up overflight reported sheen some 2miles by 2 miles in size moving to the NW.  The sheen was reported to be light, mostly silver sheen with some rainbow. NOAA provides trajectories [SEP] Posted below is a report from Charlie Henry, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on the NOAA response to an 8 July 2003, report of a Mystery Sheen offshore of Vermilion Bay, Louisiana. _______________________________ Mystery Sheen, South of Vermilion Bay On the afternoon of 8 July 2003, the NOAA SSC was contacted by USCG Marine Safety Office (MSO) Morgan City in reference to a mystery sheen observed by a third party in the Gulf of Mexico off the Louisiana coast south of Vermilion Bay. The initial report was a 2.5 mile x 2.5 mile ???€?black sheen.???€? Additional reports suggested that the observed sheen might not have been oil (?). The MSO requested trajectory support. The observed oil (or sheen) was observed less than five miles from the coast west of Marsh Island. A follow-up overflight reported sheen some 2miles by 2 miles in size moving to the NW. The sheen was reported to be light, mostly silver sheen with some rainbow. The source remained unknown. NOAA reported to the USCG that landfall would be expected given strong on-shore winds. Given the remoteness of this area, the lack of any observed recoverable oil, and the expected high degree of natural dissipation, no further support was requested by the MSO. Attached is the trajectory provided to the MSO. This short report represent the initial and final report on the mystery sheen reported on 8 July. [SEP] Date: July 8, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery Spill off Vermilion Bay FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Debra Simecek-Beatty MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at the trajectory implications of a mystery slick reported off Vermilion Bay, Louisiana. These notes are based on the following information: On July 8, 2003 at 1400 CDT, the USCG reported a 2.5 x 2.5 mile sheen of black oil centered at 29?? 29.29???€?N, 92?? 12.72'W (5 miles south of Cheniere au Tigre). On-scene winds were reported from the south-southwest. At this time, the source of the spill is unknown. If any of this initial information is incorrect or if new information becomes available, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast This evening winds are forecast from the south-southeast at 10 knots. By Wednesday morning, winds are expected to be from the south at 10 knots. Thursday, winds are forecast from the south-southwest at 10 knots. During this forecast period, seas are expected at 2 feet. 2) Trajectory Analysis This time of year off Vermilion Bay, we would expect a weak surface current flowing east to west. The winds this evening are expected to be from the south- southeast at 10 knots. Given this information, we would expect the sheens nearest the coast to begin contacting the shoreline this evening with the offshore oil continuing to move onshore into tomorrow afternoon. Our best estimate indicates the oil is likely to come ashore between Freshwater Bayou Channel eastward to 3 miles east of Cheniere au Tigre. While unlikely, if the winds have a westerly component in the next 24-hours or if the currents reverse, then Southwest Pass and the Marsh Island area would be threatened. Similarly, a stronger coastal flow than expected to the west could result in areas near Mulberry Island being threatened.
Reported sheen off the coast of Louisiana, near Ship Shoal. The sheen was describes as a mixture of rainbow and black sheen, 3 miles long by 1/2 mile wide. No pollution was found. [SEP] MYSTERY SLICK 1730 CDT, Wednesday June 18, 2003 Sunset (6/18): 2005 Sunrise (6/19): 0605 Sunset (6/19): 2005 _____________________________________ 36 HOUR FORECAST: Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 knots. Thursday, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 5-10 knots. _____________________________________ Waves: Tonight through Thursday, the seas are predicted to be 1-2 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Thursday, a chance of thunderstorms is expected for the region. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Thursday, partly cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range with a high near 90 to a low in the mid 70's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday through Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the W at 10-15 knots. Seas 1-2 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of thunderstorms is predicted. [SEP] Posted below is a report, capturing information on the NOAA response to a Mystery Sheen reported in the area of Ship Shoal, offshore Louisiana, 18 June 2003 _______________________________ On 18 June NOAA Hazmat received a request from MSO Morgan City to provide trajectory information for a reported sheen off the coast of Louisiana, near Ship Shoal. The sheen was describes as a mixture of rainbow and black sheen, 3 miles long by 1/2 mile wide. Weather and Trajectory information was provided. Follow-up: Relative to this incident, the USCG attempted to fly a follow-up mission on 19 June to look for oil pollution from the reported mystery slick. The USCG helicopter was diverted before the mission could be completed. No reports of oil pollution were received by any other sources. It would appear that the slick and its impact were minor. No additional assistance was requested. [SEP] Date: June 18, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry USCG LTCMDR Robert Mitchum, MSO Morgan City FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery Sheen FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT GLEN WATABAYASHI, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of sheen sighted off the Louisiana coast. On June 18, 2003, 1415 local time, a sheen was reported off the coast of Louisiana, near Ship Shoal. The sheen was describes as a mixture of rainbow and black sheen, 3 miles long by 1/2 mile wide, oriented to the WNW. The location was given as 28?? 59???€? 31???€????€?N 90?? 59???€? 20???€????€? W. The USCG has requested a forecast for the movement of the reported sheen. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) 36 Hour Wind Forecast: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 knots. Thursday, the winds are forecast to be from the W at 5-10 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis: The movement of the sheen will be dominated by wind drift. Given the current observations and the forecast of SW winds, the sheen is expected to move to the North East towards Isle Dernieres. If the winds overnight are on the strong side of the forecast, any oil that persists could reach the west shore of Isle Dernieres by morning. If it has not reached the shore by morning, the winds are forecast to shift to be from the west, moving any remaining floating oil to the East, parallel to shore.
At approximately 5:30 pm on Sunday April 27, 2003, the US Coast Guard's Marine Safety Office in Providence, Rhode Island received a report of a discharge from the barge "B No. 120" owned by the Bouchard Transportation Company of Hicksville, NY. The barge grounded, outside of the shipping lanes, at the entrance to Buzzard Bay in southern Massachusetts. Following the grounding, the tug and barge continued to anchorage LIMA, where it officially reported the discharge to the USCG. The barge B-120 had a capacity of 97,000 barrels (4,074,000 gallons) and discharged approximately 2,333 barrels (98,000 gallons) of heavy number 6 fuel. Overall, more than 90 miles of coast line were impacted (40 miles of direct impact and 50 miles of tar ball impacts), 415 birds were killed, and the habitats for three endangered species (roseate tern, piping plover and NE tiger beetle) were oiled. Clean up costs exceeded $23 million. [SEP] SWA1 = Section flushed with two inch hose SWA2 = Section flushed with high pressure Photo credit: NOAA [SEP] Evening Report 06/04/03 Sediment Replacement Project The RP is working on a sediment removal and replacement for several heavily oiled non-vegetated sand/cobble/boulder shorelines. This plan will require approval by Army Corps of Engineers, the MDEP and the local Conservation Commission and such approval requests are in process. Currently, the plan calls for the removal and replacement of like material under the supervision of the state coastal geologist. A meeting with the Fairhaven Conservation Commission (the town in which most of the sediment replacement is needed) will take place tomorrow. Surface Washing Agent The RP has received approval for the testing and subsequent use of CytoSol (a NCP listed surface washing agent). The choice of CytoSol was made following a bench scale test in small pools of PES 51, Corexit 9580 and CytoSol. CytoSol was chosen based on its effectiveness in the bench scale test, its relatively low toxicity and its cost. The field test will take place tomorrow (today???€?s test was called due to rain) on a 30 ft X 30 ft section of oiled cobbles and boulders on Long Island. If it is determined that (1) the product lifts and floats the oil and (2) the refloated oil can be recovered by snare and sorbent sweep, then the product will be used operationally on selected areas. These areas will be along shoreline segments slated for sediment replacement and removal that cannot be removed due to access or sediment size. A report on the test and application will be forthcoming. Snare Traps The snare traps deployed off Barneys Joy and other location to determine where submerged oil may be moving have been regularly checked and replaced. To date, only the Barneys Joy traps have yielded (light) oiling. The traps in other areas will be redeployed tomorrow to encompass a wider scope around Barneys Joy in order to scale the problem. The conventional wisdom holds that oil-sand mixed tarballs are being liberated during the cleaning process at Barneys Joy and are impacting the snare traps. Nevertheless, we are endeavoring to prove that oil is not coming from some offshore source, yet undiscovered. These trap will be deployed with snare running along their buoy lines to determine if any oil is moving within the water column, unseen. Steve Lehmann NOAA SSC [SEP] Evening Report June 09-11, 2003 Surface Washing Agent Test CytoSol was used on a 45 ft wide by 15 ft deep section of heavily oiled cobble/boulder armored shoreline on Thursday (06/05/03) with mixed results. The section was sprayed with 5 gallons of the chemical one hour prior to flushing (the prescribed dose and soak time), using a hand-held wand sprayer. Hard boom was set in the water with sweep sorbent inside. Several barriers of sorbent snare were set and workers were standing by with sorbent pads. Half the section was flushed with ambient water using a two inch hose and trash pump along with a T-bar deluge. The other half used a high pressure ambient water spray with a T-bar deluge. Section One (low pressure flush & T-bar) The flush liberated oil from the cobbles and the oil was collected in the snare and pads. Clearly the pads worked better than the snare on this oil as it had been thinned by the CytoSol. The surface of the cobble/boulder was not visually improved and likely would not meet the strict standards established for shorelines used recreationally. Section Two (high pressure spray & T-bar) This procedure released more oil than the flush, cleaning the stone???€?s surface more completely. However, the addition of the chemical did not make an appreciable difference from the high pressure alone (observed in other locations in the spill impact zone). Conclusions While the team established by the U.C. to judge the technique were not adverse to the wider use of the CytoSol (under certain restrictions), the Operations Section felt it did not provide enough advantage to justify its use in anything but very selective areas. At the time of this writing there is no plan to employ CytoSol as a treatment. Personal Observations on the CytoSol Test I must rely on the Operation personnel when they say that is provides too little marginal benefit to justify its wider use, however, it is possible that if this product (or a similar product) had been used as a first order response technique, when the oil was much fresher, it may have taken the cobbles down to a light coat or even a stain. Clearly the oil during the test was heavily weathered and very sticky. High pressure washes remove the oil without CytoSol, but flushing does nothing. A test of CytoSol or other surface washing agents should be encouraged during the first days of a #6 oil spill in order to test this theory. Of course this would require pre-authorization well ahead of the spill. Barney???€?s Joy Beach Friday, the FOSC, FRC (USFWS Federal Response Coordinator) and the SSC made a site visit to Barney???€?s Joy beach to discuss continued treatment options and continuing logistical problems. Tensions are posed by the desire to continue cleanup on the segment (pressure from the owner of the beach, representing the recreational use of the property) and the desire to protect the nesting piping plovers (pressure from USFWS, MDFW and the Audobon Society representing the natural resource use of the beach). Currently the conflict rests with the use of large equipment to transport oily waste from the site. In one direction the equipment must be escorted by a ???€?plover monitor???€? by an existing nests to the staging area (which is used by recreational beach-goers during the season). Once the eggs hatch, this will be an extremely difficult trip as these chicks immediately begin feeding themselves and traversing the area like so many wind-blown cotton balls. As herding or harassing these chicks, even by monitors, is illegal, work must stop if they (the chicks) move into an area. In the other direction, access is very difficult. The only access is along a make-shift road which is currently thick with mud and would require substantial rebuilding in order to make passable for such a large loader. The owners of the property are resisting the work required on the road to make it workable. They have, additionally, requested that the staging area be moved to accommodate beach-goers. They have volunteered the use of their ???€?cattle barn???€? as a staging location. While this is a suitable structure, the location becomes less desirable without the use of the make-shift road. Negotiations continue and should be resolved this week. Meanwhile, the work along the beach continues in a number of fashions. While most of the buried oil has been recovered, several areas continue to be worked using either hand work or ???€?sparging???€? (inserting a hose pipe into the sand and flushing the oil from underneath). A smaller team walks the beach to collect tarballs, ranging in size from rice to a couple of centimeters. These small tarballs continue to wash ashore on Barney???€?s Joy from a source as yet undetermined. It is assumed that the work further up the beach is causing it, but oil mixed with sand in the near shore has not been ruled out. (The snare traps and snare drags continue. The latest setting, last week, is due to be retrieved Tuesday, but the only ???€?hits???€? in these traps have been seen off Barney???€?s Joy.) Nesting Success: It was reported on Tuesday that the nest of piping plovers on Barney???€?s Joy which was believed to have the least likelihood of successful chicks has hatched three of its four eggs. This is despite the fact that the male of the pair (both male and female piping plovers sit on the nest) was one of the most heavily oiled of the plovers observed. Sign Off Monday the U.C. negotiated a sign-off form for shorelines ready to move from active cleanup to restoration. Massachusetts has a rather complex system of sign off requirements. This first phase, the Immediate Response
Chemical Tanker M/V Bow Lion collides with a tow boat causing a 75 foot by 1 foot gash to the starboard side 3 feet above the water line. Chemicals were monitored to make sure they did not hit water supplies, let the chemicals evaporate and dissolve in the water. [SEP] Attached and posted below is a report from Charlie Henry, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on an 25 April 2003, collision of the chemical tanker M/V Bow Lion, which occurred on the Mississippi River near mile marker 144 north of New Orleans, Louisiana. _______________________________ M/V Bow Lion Xylene Spill, Mississippi River Initial and Final Report Just after midnight on the morning of 25 April 2003, a chemical tanker collided with a towboat pushing 38 hopper-type grain barges on the Mississippi River near Garyville, Louisiana (near mile marker 144 and north of New Orleans). The collision resulted in a 75 foot by 1 foot gash to the starboard side of the chemical tanker M/V BOW LION and a chemical spill. The gash was located approximately 3 feet above the ships water line. Just before 2:00 AM on Friday, 25 April 2003, the NOAA HAZMAT Duty Officer notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of the collision and chemical spill. The SSC contacted USCG Marine Safety Office New Orleans and began the preliminary hazard assessment for the reported products on-board the chemical carrier, which included acrylonitrile, chloroform, ethylene dichloride, and xylene. At the time of the initial notification, the actual chemical released was unknown. What was known was that workers near the accident were reporting a strong sweet odor and complaining of headaches and possible nausea. Significant public health concerns would be warranted should the spilled chemical be acrylonitrile since it has an IDLH of only 100 ppm by inhalation. Choroform and ethylene dichloride would sink into to the bottom and be transported downstream with just enough water solubility to create a potential risk to public water supplies. The least of the chemical hazards was the xylene product. The USCG requested the SSC to report to the Marine Safety Office in New Orleans. In route, the SSC was contacted and updated on the incident. One of the two tanks holed was empty; the other was filled with xylene. Xylene is a commercial mixture of three dimethylbenzene isomers and commonly used as a solvent (paint thinner). Xylene constituents are also a common components of gasoline and jet fuels, and like such products, will float on water and evaporate quickly. Some of the product would be lost to dissolution (the product is only slightly soluble in river water), most of the spilled product would evaporate in probably less than 6 hours (a conservative estimate based on profession judgment alone). Monitoring teams were being dispatched to assess the area. NOAA recommended that areas of debris accumulation on the river be investigated after first light as any unevaporated product might be trapped in those areas and present a more persistent hazard. Of the total volume reported in the hold of 294 Metric Tons, only 125 Metric Tons (or approximately 42,000 gallons) was spilled. Most measured values during the initial monitoring were below the TLV. By 10:00 AM all values were below detection limits. The New Orleans Sewage and Water Board were notified by the MSO. No follow-up issues were identified by the MSO that would require NOAA support.
The fishing vessel F/V Leader carrying 9,000 gallons of diesel fuel ran aground on the beach near Napeaque. NY, location 40 degrees, 59 minutes, N; 72 degrees, 04 minutes, W, after the helmsman fell asleep. The F/V Leader contacted a tug and was pulled off the beach and towed to New Bedford, MA. No pollution occurred.  NOAA provided weather informationand a trajectory analysis. [SEP] F/V LEADER GROUNDING, LONG ISLAND, NEW YORK 1140 EST, Friday April 04, 2003 Sunset (04/04): 1816 Sunrise (04/05): 0526 Sunset (04/05): 1817 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 25 knots. Tonight, NE winds at 25-30 knots are predicted to decrease to 20 knots by the late evening hours. Saturday, NE winds at 15-20 knots are forecast to decrease to 10-15 knots by the late afternoon hours. Saturday night, NW winds at 30-35 knots are expected. _____________________________________ Waves: Today, the seas are expected to be 6-8 feet. Tonight, 7-9 foot seas are predicted. Saturday, 5-7 foot seas are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, spotty drizzle is expected. Tonight, rain and sleet are predicted. Saturday, rain is forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Saturday, overcast skies are expected with areas of afternoon and evening spotty fog. Visibility is predicted to be 1-3 miles. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 40's to lows in the 30???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 30-35 knots shifting to be from the north at 10-15 knots by the late morning hours then shifting to be from the SE at 10-15 knots by the evening hours. Seas 5-7 feet diminishing to 2-3 feet by the evening hours. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Monday, NE winds at 15-20 knots are predicted to increase to 25-30 knots by the evening hours. Seas 6-9 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Rain. Tuesday, NE winds at 20-25 knots are forecast to shift to be from the NW at 10 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 4-6 feet. Partly cloudy to mostly cloudy skies. Dry. [SEP] Below is a report from Ed Levine, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on a potential spill from the Fishing vessel F/V Leader on 4 April 2003. Initial and Final Report The fishing vessel F/V Leader carrying 9,000 gallons of diesel fuel ran aground on the beach near Napeaque. NY, location40 degrees, 59 minutes, N; 72 degrees, 04 minutes, W, after the helmsman fell asleep. The F/V Leader contacted a tug and was pulled off the beach and towed to New Bedford, MA. No pollution occurred. NOAA provided weather information and a trajectory analysis. [SEP] Date; April 4, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Ed Levine FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: F/V Leader FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Debra Simecek-Beatty, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request we have looked at trajectory implications of a release from a grounded vessel. These notes are based on the following information: On April 4, 2003, the F/V Leaker ran aground at 40?? 59???€?N, 72?? 04???€?W (off Napeague Beach, Long Island). The vessel is carrying 9,000 gallons of diesel and has not leaked any product at this time. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Today, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 25 knots. Tonight, NE winds at 25-30 knots are predicted to decrease to 20 knots by the late evening hours. Saturday, winds are expected from the NE at 15-20 knots and decreasing to 10-15 knots by late afternoon hours. Saturday night, NW winds at 30-35 knots are expected. Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 30-35 knots shifting to be from the N at 10-15 knots by the late morning hours. Sunday evening, winds are expected from the SE at 10-15 knots. 2) Oil Weathering Lighter refined products, such as diesel, typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. It should be noted that lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic then heavier oils. Therefore, these oils may not present an involved cleanup problem, however they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat problem in low energy marine environments. 3) Trajectory Analysis The vessel is currently aground in the surf zone off Long Island. If a catastrophic release were to occur, we expect much of the oil to be dispersed into the water column. With the forecast winds from the northeast, any visible sheens will likely move down coast (to the southwest) and offshore. With forecast winds from the northwest, any visible sheens will likely move up coast (to the northeast) and offshore. If the sheens reach the shoreline in a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film-like bathtub ring (in the case of diesel) is common. For a catastrophic release of 9, 000 gallons of diesel, a sheen extending 2 to 3 miles from the vessel is not uncommon. Since the forecast indicates winds 20 knots or greater, it is likely any visible sheen would be considerable smaller.
Mystery spill in the Gulf of Mexico near the Marsh Islands. Observed silver and rainbow sheens. No follow-up requested, only trajectory analysis. [SEP] MYSTERY SPILL, SOUTH OF MARSH ISLAND, LOUISIANA 1520 CDT, Tuesday April 15, 2003 Sunset (04/15): 1935 Sunrise (04/16): 0641 Sunset (04/16): 1935 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the south at 15 knots. Wednesday, south winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Wednesday night, SW winds at 15-20 knots are forecast to decrease to 10-15 knots by the late evening hours. _________________________ Waves: Tonight through Wednesday night, 4 foot seas are expected. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Wednesday night, no precipitation is predicted. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Wednesday morning, thin high clouds are forecast. Wednesday afternoon through Wednesday night, partly cloudy skies are expected. Visibility is forecast to be unrestricted. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 80???€?s to lows in the 60???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 10-15 knots shifting to be from the S-SW at 10 knots by the late morning hours. Seas 2-3 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Friday, SW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas 2-3 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Dry. Saturday, south winds at 15-20 knots are forecast. Seas 4 feet. Cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Sunday, SW winds at 15-20 knots are expected to shift and be from the north at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 4 feet. Cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Hydrology (Atchafalaya River): Currently, the gauge reading at Morgan City is 2.8 feet with a flood stage of 4 feet. The forecast for the Atchafalaya River at Morgan City is 2.8 feet for the next 5 days. The norm gauge reading for this time of year at Morgan City is 3.5 feet. Current estimated flow rate is 150,000 CFS with a norm for this time of year being 260,000 CFS. The Atchafalaya River is considered to be flowing below normal. [SEP] Date: 1600 CDT April 15, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery Spill, offshore Marsh Island, LA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a mystery slick offshore of Marsh Island, LA. These notes are based on the following information: A mystery slick of 1 nm x 12 nm of silver to rainbow sheens was reported at 1500 CDT approximately 8 nm offshore of Marsh Island, LA. The position of the slick was given as 29?? 26???€? 26???€? N, 092?? 02???€? 05???€? W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Tonight (Tuesday) winds are expected to be from South at 15 knots increasing to be from the South at 15-20 knots Wednesday morning. Late Wednesday afternoon winds are expected to change to be from the Southwest at 15 to 20 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY At this time of year, we expect a weak coastal flow to the west in this area of Louisiana. With winds from the south, oil could contact the Louisiana coast in the vicinity of Southwest Pass, Vermillion Bay overnight to early Wednesday morning. Because the orientation of the slick is unknown, we estimate the oil could contact the shoreline as far east as the southern shore of Marsh Island to as far west as Freshwater Bayou Channel. If the oil were to reach the mouth of Southwest Pass during a flood tide, some oil could move into Vermillion Bay, though we would not expect this to be a large portion of the total oil in the slick. [SEP] Date: 1730 CDT April 15, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Mystery Spill, offshore Marsh Island, LA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a mystery slick offshore of Marsh Island, LA. These notes are based on the following information: Two mystery slicks of silver to rainbow sheens were reported at 1700 CDT approximately 3-4 nm offshore of Marsh Island, LA. The positions and sizes of the slicks were given as (1) 100 yds x 3/4 nm centered at 29?? 29.7???€? N, 092?? 01.4???€? W and (2) 200 yds x 1.5 nm centered at 29?? 25.55???€? N, 091?? 55.6???€? W. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Tonight (Tuesday) winds are expected to be from South at 15 knots increasing to be from the South at 15-20 knots Wednesday morning. Late Wednesday afternoon winds are expected to change to be from the Southwest at 15 to 20 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY Given the unknown type of oil creating in the slick, we are assuming a worst case for the trajectory (i.e. that the oil stays together). At this time of year, we expect a weak coastal flow to the west in this area of coastal Louisiana. With winds from the south, the oil is most likely to contact the southwestern portion of Marsh Island between an area south of Oyster Lake to as far west as Southwest Pass, Vermilion Bay. The oil could possibly contact shoreline as far west as south of Portage Lake or as far east as Shell Keys, Marsh Island, if the winds or currents are significantly different from what we would expect. If the oil were to reach the mouth of Southwest Pass during a flood tide, some oil could move into Vermilion Bay. [SEP] Attached and posted below is a report from Charlie Henry, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on an 15 April 2003, mystery spill occurring in the Gulf of Mexico near Marsh Island, Louisiana. _______________________________ MYSTERY SPILL MARSH ISLAND On Tuesday, 15 April 2003, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by USCG Marine Safety Office (MSO) Morgan City of a mystery spill in the Gulf of Mexico near Marsh Island, Louisiana. NOAA was requested to provide an oil spill trajectory forecast to the MSO. The initial report stated that the slick was some 12 nm in length and maybe 1 nm wide. Initial slick descriptions were unknown. A second report stated that the observed slick was in reality two much smaller slicks that were separated by nearly 12 nm and composed of mostly light silver sheens with some rainbow sheen also observed. The first trajectory submitted reflected the information initially provided. The second trajectory, or revised trajectory, is thought to be more accurate and reflects the information provided by the second observer. No follow-up request for support was made by the MSO.
Stranded oil, coffee grain-like weathered tar balls exposed on NW beach. Unknown cause and unknown chemicals. Beach clean-up proposed with minimal sand removal. [SEP] Attached and posted below is a report from Charlie Henry, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on an 12 April 2003, mystery spill occurring in the Cypremort Point State Park in South Louisiana. _______________________________ CYPREMORT POINT MYSTERY SPILL Initial and Final Report On Saturday, 12 April 2003, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified by MSO Morgan City of a mystery spill that had impacted the Cypremort Point State Park in South Louisiana. At the time of the notification, the regional SSC was in Seattle, Washington. Stranded oil, including weathered tar balls, was reported along the exposed northwest beach. The level of impact was greatest near a natural collection point that also contained accumulations of natural organic detrital material locally called coffee grounds because of its appearance. The SSC advised that, if possible, overflights be conducted to look for other locations of impact and any surface oil slicks. The USCG reported that a cleanup contractor had been hired and was cleaning the beach using manual oil recovery techniques. The SSC stressed that sand removal should be minimized and that the cleanup endpoint should me the park superintendent???€?s level of concern. NOAA contacted the USFWS to provide additional notification and coordination on any potential wildlife issues. The USFWS response specialist made a field trip to the location and provided additional on-scene coordination to assist the cleanup effort. The spill volume was unknown, but thought to be relatively small (maybe 5 bbl). No additional impacted areas outside of the state park were reported. Photographs taken by USFWS are provided in a separate entry. [SEP] Photographs were taken by Warren Lorentz, US FWS: Pic#2282. Picture of entire beach (looking west). Focus on the high ridge line. Some oil soaked sand still remains following initial response and clean-up. [SEP] Photographs were taken by Warren Lorentz, US FWS: Pic#2287. Intermittent tar balls. Unoiled coffee ground bands are also present. [SEP] Photographs were taken by Warren Lorentz, US FWS Pic#2291. Western end of beach. An area 3' X 100' that had been missed or will be addressed. The dark band close to the waters edge is not oil but the usual coffee ground organic substance. Higher up (the beige color band) is the oil soaked sand. Approximately 1/8-1/4 inch penetration. [SEP] Photographs were taken by Warren Lorentz, US FWS: Pic#2288. Tar balls melting on the dry coffee grounds. On the right side of the picture is what is left following cleanup - some oiled soaked sand remains. [SEP] Photographs were taken by Warren Lorentz, US FWS: Pic#2280. Close up of tar ball and oil soaked sand
On March 5, 2003 the F/V Angel Dawn ran aground and was abandoned. The ship crew was rescued by USCG. An overflight the next day showed debris and 2 sheens heading away from the shore. No shoreline and environmental impacts. [SEP] Below is a report from Gary Ott, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on a vessel grounding and oil spill 5-6 March 2003. Initial ? Final Report: At approximately 1430 hours on 5 March 2003, the 74-foot F/V Angel Dawn ran aground in Oregon Inlet, NC. The grounded vessel was abandoned and the fishing vessel's crew was removed by the Coast Guard. 3200 gallons of diesel fuel was reported to have been on the fishing vessel. At the request of MSO Wilmington, NOAA advised: A 3500 gallon diesel spill under the forecasted conditions would generate a visible sheen that extended for 1 ? 2 miles and persist for 4 ? 6 hours. If spilled in the surf zone, we would expect a bathtub ring type coating within a few hundreds of yard from the vessel. If it is spilled outside of the surf zone under the SW or WSW wind conditions forecast for today, we would expect a 1 ?2 mile sheen extending to the NE to NNE of the vessel with no shoreline impact. If the oil was spilled offshore under the NE wind conditions expected on Friday, some oil could impact the shoreline downwind of vessel. If this occurs we would expect a few scattered streamers and a few hundred yards of a bathtub ring type coating along the beach. On the morning of 6 March the Coast Guard over-flight reveled that the Angel Dawn had broken up. Debris and two fuel sheens were observed moving N.W. of the wreck in the area of N35-52-52 / W075-26-43 and N35-49-02 / W075-28-46. There was no sheen observed at the site of the wreaked vessel. The Coast Guard helicopter crew reported that their shoreline search revealed, "no environmental impact and all sheen and debris were drifting away from the shore." On the 6th of March, MSO Wilmington's pollution investigator also reported that the sheen that he observed was broken and was roughly 100 feet by 200 feet. The investigator also reported that on 6 March the Angel Dawn was no longer visible. [SEP] F/V Angel Dawn ran aground and was abandoned. Ship crew rescued by USCG. Overflight next day showed debris and 2 sheens heading away from the shore. No shoreline and environmental impacts. [SEP] Date: March 6, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Gary Ott/ USCG FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division SUBJECT: Grounded F/V Angel Dawn FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911 _______________________________________________________ The scenario as reported: Last night it was reported that a 74 ft wood hull fishing vessel went aground north of Cape Hatteras at 35?? 42.16???€? N by 75?? 31.0???€?W. It had 3200 ? 3500 gallons of diesel fuel onboard. As of this morning, the vessel is submerged right off the beach, possibly breaking apart. It is unknown if any of the fuel oil has been lost. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER FORECAST Today winds are expected to be from the SW at 15 ? 20 knots with 2-3 foot seas. Tonight winds are expected to be from the WSW at 20 ? 25 knots with 5 ? 6 foot seas. Friday winds are forecast to be from the NE at 15 ? 25 knots with 5 ? 7 foot seas. 2) TRAJECTORY A 3500 gallon diesel spill under the forecasted conditions would generate a visible sheen that extended for 1 ? 2 miles and persist for 4 ? 6 hours. If spilled in the surf zone, we would expect a bathtub ring type coating within a few hundreds of yard from the vessel. If it is spilled outside of the surf zone under the SW or WSW wind conditions forecast for today, we would expect a 1 ? 2 mile sheen extending to the NE to NNE of the vessel with no shoreline impact. If the oil was spilled offshore under the NE wind conditions expected on Friday, some oil could impact the shoreline downwind of vessel. If this occurs we would expect a few scattered streamers and a few hundred yards of a bathtub ring type coating along the beach.  2) OIL FATE Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API = 37.6 Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 20 knots Wave Height = 5 ft Water Temperature = 65 deg F Time of Initial Release = March 6, 1000 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 3,500 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 3,500 - 10 - 8 - 82 2 3,500 19 28 54 3 3,500 - 24 - 49 - 27 4 3,500 25 62 13 5 3,500 - 26 - 68 - 6
Pipeline failure, booms deployed to contain oil and minimize coastal impact. 52bbls recovered that day, there was wildlife and environmental impacts. Pipeline was repaired and clean up, oil recovery and wildlife and environmental restoration intiated and completed. April 22 2003, and overflight determined few patches of sheens and will be left to biodegrade naturally. [SEP] The following photographs were taken during the 27 March field survey (photo credit NOAA). [SEP] Update (24 March 2003) During a fixed wing overflight on 20 March, USFWS observed rainbow sheens derived from the unnamed marsh and moving N over Lake Grande Ecaille and emulsified oil in the broken marsh habitat (see attached photos). The USFWS observer characterized the sheens as significant and extending across the lake. Feeding pelicans were also observed in the area. Such sheening was not expected and suggests that either the sorbent booms were not being effective (due to placement or saturation with oil) or there was a greater volume of residual oil in the marsh than was observed during previous overflights. This has lead to speculation that the hard containment boom was removed prematurely, and the observations on 20 March would appear to support this argument. During a routine scheduled RP overflight on 21 March to assess maintenance activities, the RP also observed sheen and the emulsified oil, but stated that the sheens were not ???€?significant,???€? yet the conditions were different (two different days). A follow-up RP overflight is scheduled for Monday, 24 March (today), and if needed, an on-water field trip to assess residual clean issues is planned for Tomorrow. While the observed sheening on 20 March was greater than expected, the forecasted N-NE winds combined with an active sorbent maintenance schedule should have reduce the potential for such chronic sheening through last weekend. It is difficult to estimate how much oil was observed by the USFWS overflight on 20 March. To help put the volume of surface sheen in prospective, consider the following (SSC prospective only): contiguous light sheen over one square mile may represent 1 bbl of oil; contiguous bright rainbow sheen over the same area would represent approximately 5 bbl of oil. If the sheens observed covered five square miles of area, the sheens observed may represent between 5 and 25 bbl of oil. From the pictures provided, the volume is probably toward the lower of the two values, but also represents a continuous source given high water and southerly winds. Also of note, even the lower value should not be considered insignificant. One should also consider that there may have been small ???€?fragments???€? of weathered bulk oil in the observed sheen as such was observed in the broken marsh on 13 March. The term ???€?fragment???€? was used since much of the oil observed in the broken marsh had mixed with organic matter and did not easily form contiguous streamers. Natural oil degradation was expected to have continued since 13 March. Based on the observations of 20 March, there is speculation that more weathered oil was trapped in some of the more dense marsh just behind the north shore or trapped in wrack and organic depositional matter (locally termed ???€?coffee grounds???€? because of their appearance). If true, it would have contributed to the oil flushed during the event observed on 20 March. Either way, there is only a finite volume of residual oil remaining in the impacted marsh. Any strong winds with a southerly component combined with high water levels could create similar events if the current passive recovery strategy fails (as observed on 20 March), but future sheening events are expected to be of a lesser magnitude. Sheens that escape the Zone-1 North marsh island are not expected to persist based on observations of similar sheens observed during the first few days of the spill response - such speculation should be confirmed. The bottom-line, passive recovery is continuing and pollution clearly remains in Zone-1 North. The NOAA SSC will follow-up with the USCG and the RP to assess if any changes in response strategy are needed. [SEP] The following photographs were taken during the 27 March field survey (photo credit NOAA). [SEP] On Thursday, 27 March 2003, the NOAA SSC and two RP representatives conducted a field survey to assess residual oil contamination in the northern zone of the unnamed marsh island (known by the spill responders as Zone-1 North of Mardi Gras Island). Overall the cleanup has progressed well, but isolated pockets of residual oil contamination were identified along the wrack debris line and adjacent Spartina marsh. Clearly, these areas were in part responsible for the sheens observed on 20 March during the USFWS overflight. Most of the marsh within the northern zone that had been impacted some 25 days earlier was free of observable oil and sheen. Based on the field survey, some adjustments to sorbent boom placement were recommended to retard future sheening. Included in the recommendations was the placement of additional boom along the northern shore where additional oil pockets were observed. This report focus on characterizing the sources of residual oil contamination observed during the field survey and response recommendations from the NOAA SSC???€?s prospective. As previously stated, isolated pockets of free oil were observed along the northern shoreline. Most were in or adjacent to the wrack debris line. The oiling was not contiguous, but highly sporadic. Access to these areas is restricted and only possible by airboat. The dead wrack itself has acted as a natural sorbent and what free oil that was observed was thinly spread on overlaying water or trapped and adsorbed into the dead vegetation that constitutes the wrack itself. The ???€?thinness???€? of the surface oil contamination was observed while attempting to collect a representative sample for chemical analysis. While the surface oil is black, it is apparently a very thin slick. Removing the oiled wrack would be problematic given the difficultly in accessing the sites. Collateral damage to the adjacent vegetative marsh habitat would argue against physical removal. Oil adsorbed into the dead wrack is expected to degrade naturally, and the wrack matrix may actually enhance the rate of oil degradation. The NOAA SSC recommends that these areas be allowed to flush naturally and sorbent booms be maintained to collect oil and oil sheens released during high tides. Small pocket ???€?beaches???€? composed of organic detritus or coffee grounds are a natural feature along the northern shoreline. The coffee grounds are more than a foot deep at many locations. The shoreline itself is mostly composed of peat and is very soft; few of these areas will support a person standing. Most of these shoreline areas were observed to have been impacted early in the response. At present, most of the coffee ground depositional areas appear to pose little threat as a source of secondary sheens after 25 days of natural recovery. At one location, the SSC was able to exit from the airboat onto the shoreline to assess residual oil contamination. A pit was dug to below the water table: no oil sheen was observed. At another location, where coffee grounds were deposited adjacent to broken wrack and oiled marsh, visible oil contamination was observed. Like the oiled wrack, physical removal would be problematic due to access limitations: the environmental trade-off appears to be in favor of natural recovery with sorbent booms deployed to collect any secondary sheening during the natural recovery process. Pockets of highly emulsified oil mixed with organic detrital matter and algae were observed. From the air, these packets appear as brown emulsified oil, but from the ground they are clearly dominated by non-oil organic matter. The term scum is a better characterization than emulsified oil. While the oil scum does have a soapy feel, it doesn???€?t appear to sheen or pose a threat to adjacent vegetation or wildlife. Based on field observations, the NOAA SSC recommends that the scum be left in place and allowed to degrade naturally. In addition, it would be very difficult to recover this material manually since it will not easily adhere to sorbents and manual recovery using nets would be very difficult. A sample was collected for detailed chemical analysis to quantify and characterize any oil residuals in the scum matrix. A total of three samples were collected during the field survey for chemical analysis. Two samples of surface oil in wrack were collected at 29?? 21.205 Latitude 089?? 48.486 Longitude and 29?? 21.412 Latitude 089?? 48.821 Longitude. A sample of emulsified oil scum was collected near Flag 14. The field samples will be submitted to LSU for chemical analysis and comparison to the original reference oil. In summary, the field survey provided a better characterization of the sources of residual oil contamination. Sporadic pockets of thin surface oil were observed in wrack and broken marsh along the northern shoreline. Overall, few sheens were observed in interior of Zone-1 North (the northern section of the unnamed marsh island). Continued passive recovery was recommended, as was the placement of additional sorbent boom along the northern shore. [SEP] The
Natural gas pipeline leak, NOAA provides ignition parameter, weather conditions, and Lower Explosion Limit (LEL). Next day pipeline is pumped with nitrogen to neutralize fire/explosion hazard. [SEP] ALOHA Text Summary [SEP] ALOHA Footprint using real weather conditions. [SEP] Attached is a report from Charlie Henry, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on an 21 Febuary 2003, natural gas pipeline leak near Mobile, AL, [SEP] ALOHA Footprint
On the evening of 19 February 2004, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by MSO New Orleans of an allision between the Freighter BRIGHT STATE and the Tanker GENMAR ALEXANDRA. The spill volume was later estimated at 518 bbls of a heavy fuel oil. The cause of the accident remains under investigation. The impact resulted in several gashes into the port side of the tanker ship and damage to a heavy fuel oil tank. The SSC immediately responded on-scene at the request of the USCG and requested weather and trajectory modeling support from the NOAA HAZMAT Active cleanup was completed at the Avondale location on 29 February and at the Belair site on 5 March 2004. [SEP] Attached are a series of photographs from the Avondale site visit (26 Feb). All photographs were taken by the NOAA SSC. [SEP] Photos of floating and stranded oil taken by the NOAA SSC. [SEP] Attached are a series of photographs from the Avondale site visit (26 Feb). All photographs were taken by the NOAA SSC. [SEP] Attached is a field report that documents the progress at the Avondale cleanup site. Photographs are included with the document. Format is pdf. [SEP] Resources at Risk for M/V Genmar Alexandra, Mississippi River, LA This report was prepared on 20 February 2004. Information in this report is based on the assumption that an estimated 1000 bbl of #6 bunker oil was released into the Mississippi River near mile marker 125 (Hahnville) on 19 February 2004. This report covers the area from approximately River Mile 125 to River Mile 10. This report does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for spill location information. Endangered/Threatened Species An endangered fish may be present along the river (RM 125-120, RM 104-103). Threatened raptors may be nesting in Salvador WMA and marshes near RM 125-120 and RM 85-80. Juvenile gulf sturgeon (federally threatened) may be present near Phoenix (RM 60-50) and in the lower river (RM 25-10). A great egret rookery (average 13 individuals) occurs slightly south of Venice (RM 11-10). Rare bats and rare turtles occur near Gretna (RM 97-96). A rare seabird may be present near Poydras (RM 85-80). A rare raptor may be present near woodland (RM 55-50). Birds Colonial waterbirds may be nesting in wetlands along the river (RM 125-110). Wintering waterfowl may be present in wetlands throughout the area. Lesser scaup may be present on inland waterways near Gretna (RM 100-90). [SEP] Attached is a field report that documents the current cleanup issues at the Belair site. [SEP] At present, cleanup operations continue at two location on the Mississippi River: the Avondale Shipyard (mm 108) and the batture area adjacent to Belair (between mm 66 and 65). Good progress is being made at both locations. On 26 February, at the request of MSO New Orleans, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) made a site visit to the Avondale Ship yard to assess both the current cleanup operation and a report of additional cleanup required at a second raft of logs and debris. The site visit was coordinated with representatives of the land owner, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, and the USCG (represented by the SSC). Active cleanup was on-going where heavily oiled debris had been previously identified. Some oil in the form of splotches of oil on logs and oil residue trapped within one small section was observed at the site in question. It was determined that the current cleanup was progressing effectively and that the second raft of logs and debris did not need to be removed to meet cleanup goals (see attached photographs and read below for additional information). Today (27 February), the NOAA SSC along with representatives from Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality and the RP???€?s spill management team conducted a site visit of the Belair site. More than 16 roll-off boxes of oil and contaminated debris have been removed, but the operation is only half complete. Tomorrow the NOAA SSC will conduct a second site visit to the Belair location with the expressed goal of developing a detailed site map to track cleanup progress (see attached photos). Additional Information Site Aerial Photograph 01 provides a snapshot overview of the Avondale area on 21 February. After four days, the current cleanup has progressed to the point where crews are manually removing the last of the oiled debris (see photo 01) by hand. Some additional cleanup is required to remove oiled debris lodged on the front side on the dock facility as agreed to in the original cleanup plan. The area in question was a raft or logs and debris located on the upriver side of the dock facility and is identified in the aerial photo. Clearly from the air, the upriver raft of logs appears ???€?clean???€? relative to the downriver raft where heavy oiling was observed. Land owner representatives requested that cleanup be conducted in this second area to remove oil contamination. The RP???€?s spill management team acknowledged that ???€?some???€? oil was present, but did not believe that cleanup was justified. In an effort to resolve the cleanup dispute, a meeting and site visit was conducted on 25 February that included representatives from the RP???€?s spill management team, land owner representatives, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, and the USCG (represented by the SSC). Photo 02 provides a ground-level snapshot of the site. The site visit confirmed the aerial assessment that the site was not heavy oiled. Splotches of oil were observed on some of the debris and one small area (maybe 2 feet by 3 feet) exhibited greater oil pollution than anywhere else within the second site (see photos 3 and 4). Adsorbent pads swished in the debris yielded only small particles of tar-like oil pollution (see photo 5). Land owner representatives stated that the amount of oil observed would not affect shipyard operation, but expressed concern that the residual oil would sheen during warmer weather conditions and that the Avondale site might be blamed as a polluter. The general consensus was that the small quantity of oil, combined with expected oil weathering, would not create a significant secondary pollution threat. Also, the site is a natural collection point for trash and debris as well as an industrial area and not considered a sensitive habitat. At the time of the site visit, there was organic foam and scum flowing into the site. That material was not thought to be oil nor was it believed to be related to the GENMAR ALEXANDRA incident. The land owner representatives did not fully support this opinion and requested that the site be cleaned. The SSC suggested that snare (pom-poms on a rope) be swashed in the small area of greater oil accumulation. If free oil, which could be a secondary pollution threat was present, the snare should readily pickup that oil and quickly become saturated. If it should be extremely difficult to recover the observed oil residue, the recovery effort would have confirmed that no significant quantities of free oil were present. [SEP] Initial Report On the evening of 19 February 2004, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator was notified by MSO New Orleans of an allision between the Freighter BRIGHT STATE and the Tanker GENMAR ALEXANDRA near mile marker (mm) 125 on the Mississippi River. This position placed the vessel some 30 miles up-river of New Orleans, Louisiana. The time of the accident was reported as 8:00 PM (local time). The amount of oil released was initially unknown but thought to be several thousand bbls (the spill volume was later estimated at 518 bbls). The cause of the accident remains under investigation. The impact resulted in several gashes into the port side of the tanker ship and damage to a heavy fuel oil tank. The SSC immediately responded on-scene at the request of the USCG and requested weather and trajectory modeling support from the NOAA HAZMAT ???€?Home Team.???€? At the time of the accident, the Mississippi River water level was high and rising. River currents were in excess of 3 knots (and even greater, 4 to 5 knots, near New Orleans). A USCG overflight using an infrared camera reported that within 3 hours of the incident, a 10 mile long slick could be observed back to the vessel, which was still releasing oil. NOAA predicted that the oil might travel as far as 45 river miles before morning if the oil remained in the center of the channel. The initial responders, the foundations for forming an incident command structure, developed a response strategy and deployment scheme to attack the oil spill at first light (unsafe river conditions precluded most night operations). Operations on the tanker established source control by 11:30 PM. The initial response plan was to stage equipment at seven locations down river and as far away as Belle Chase (mm 75, some 50 miles from the release point). Water intake issues were addressed and the locks down river were requested to be closed and remain closed. More than
The NOAA SSC was notified by the Hazmat Duty Officer on Friday morning (2/14) at approximately 0630 concerning the grounding of the T/B Energy 5501 about 2 miles south of Norwalk, CT. The USCG requested the SSC on scene. The Initially, it was unknown how much home heating oil was lose from the barge. The barge was loaded with 56,000 barrels (2,352,000 gallons) and had a draft of 17.9 feet. It struck a rock charted at 18 feet mean low water. Due to the stage of the moon, falling tide, and offshore winds the water depth over the rock was minimal. The tug was hugging the CT coast to stay in the lee of winds from the NW as it headed to its destination in Port Jefferson, NY. The barge was taken to a nearby location (41deg 02.6 N / 73deg 22.053 W) and anchored. The NOAA Scientific Support Team provided the USCG initial trajectory and oil weathering information, weather, tides, and resources at risk summary. At about 0800 the CT Department of Aquaculture closed the shellfish beds in all waters in the Norwalk, Darien, and Westport area until further notice. The divers survey discovered 14 cracks and holes in all six starboard tank bottoms. The original estimate of cargo loss by the naval architect was 450 barrels (18,900 gallons). Two morning overflights (0900 and 1200) by USCG personnel spotted an oil slick extending several miles from the barge. A relief barge arrived along side the holed barge at about 1400. At 1600 the SSC, RP rep and USCG FOSC went on an overflight in a helicopter. A sheen consisting of light rainbow to silver and gray was observed several miles from the barge. It measured about 3.5 miles long by 200 yards wide at the leading edge and 600 yards wide at the trailing end. The rest of LI Sound was search and not other oil was located. The overflight also mapped locations of ice along the LI coastline. A new trajectory model was developed based on the GPS positions of the slick. With the updated oil trajectory model showing land impacts on the northern Long Island coast plans were made to pre-position protective boom as several location near identified sensitive areas. By the evening meeting at 1800 the revised estimate of lost oil was downgraded to about 53 barrels (2,226 gallons). This estimate was within the range of oil observed on the afternoon overflight. Plans were made to begin over-the-top lightering operation during the first night, but due to logistics and operational constraints they were unable to begin until later the morning of the 15th. On 2/15 the morning overflight only spotted one small streamer of light silver and gray sheen within the area predicted by the trajectory model. The stern starboard quarter of the barge was seen to be awash. No oil was observed near the barge or anywhere near the LI coast. Almost all of the oil had evaporated and naturally dispersed. The NOAA modelers were requested to provide a ?Worst Case Discharge" trajectory for a possible release from the barge on Saturday evening or Sunday morning. The new model indicated potential land impacts on LI more westerly than the oil that was initially released. Based on the updated weather forecasts for significantly worsening weather, the Unified Command decided to move the barge into Bridgeport harbor for safe haven to make temporary repairs and off-load the cargo. At present, as of 1800 this evening (2/15) the barge is in route to Bridgeport. Travel time is anticipated to be about 5 hours at two knots. Contingency plans are prepared for the possibility of spills while enroute or in Bridgeport harbor. [SEP] Aerial photograph of Bridgeport Harbor showing Motiva dock and sensitive areas. -- ------------------------------------------------------ Ed Levine NOAA SSC Phone = (212)668-6428 USCG Battery Park Building Fax = (212)668-6370 1 South Street, room 321 Email: ed.levine@noaa.gov New York, NY 10004-1466 Web site: http://response.restoration.noaa.gov [SEP] <<vessels1.jpg>> <<sheen.jpg>> <<slick.jpg>> <<vessels2.jpg>> =================================== Ed Levine NOAA / SSC USCG Battery Park Building 1 South Street, room 321 New York, NY 10004-1466 Phone = (212)668-6428 Fax = (212)668-6370 Web Page = <http://response.restoration.noaa.gov/> <<Levine, Edwin.vcf>> [SEP] Try these pictures [SEP] Energy 5501 Update: 16 February 2003 At 2300 the barge was safely moored at the Motiva dock in Bridgeport harbor. No additional oil was released during the transit. On the morning overflight the FOSC observed no sheens in the harbor or in the coastal area. As of this morning no lightering had begun. A barge was being positioned next to the Energy 5501 for offloading. The plan is to begin lightering oil from #6 starboard tank and then pump air into the tank to help raise the stern quarter out of the water. Currently there is 10 ? 12 inches of water on the deck. The barge is boomed at the dock and protection boom has been place in the creek in case of any additional discharge. Issues of Special Interest: ?In Time Delivery? The barge Energy 5501 was en route to Port Jefferson, NY for an ?in time delivery? to a storage and distribution facility. This means that without this cargo the facility would not have sufficient home heating oil to maintain its delivery schedules to local residents. This has become standard practice with the price of oil fluctuating at this time. The barge operators had to scramble to find a replacement delivery in order to keep the fuel flowing and avert people losing heat during this cold winter weather. Safe Haven Due to the condition of the barge (at least 14 holes and cracks in the bottom) and the impending severe weather, the FOSC requested that the barge be allowed to enter Bridgeport harbor. The state of Connecticut OSC agreed with the FOSC?s decision. Even though the barge was in CT waters it was destined for a NY port. The state of CT could have denied the initial request for Safe Haven. The FOSC began exploring the issue to see what the alternative would have been had CT denied the request, but since they did allow the barge in the questions were never answered. [SEP] BARGE ?ENERGY 5501? SPILL, LONG ISLAND SOUND, NEW YORK 1730 EST, Monday February 17, 2003 Sunset (2/17): 1729 Sunrise (2/18): 0647 Sunset (2/18): 1729 36 HOUR FORECAST: _________________________ Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 30-35 knots, becoming N at 20-25 knots in the late evening. Tomorrow, the winds are predicted to be from the N at 10-15 knots, becoming light and variable by late morning. Tomorrow night, light and variable SW winds are forecast. _________________________ Waves: Tonight, the seas are expected to be 4 feet, diminishing to 2 feet in the late evening. Coastal flooding is forecast, with tides expected to be 1-2 feet above normal. Tomorrow through tomorrow night, the seas are predicted to be 1-2 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight, intermittent, light snow is forecast. Tomorrow, dry weather is expected. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, cloudy skies are predicted. Tomorrow, cloudy skies with afternoon clearing is forecast. _________________________ Temperature: The temperatures are expected to range from highs in the low 30s to lows in the low to mid 20s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, SW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast, becoming SW at 15-20 late in the day. Seas 2-3 feet. Partly sunny skies. Dry. Thursday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Seas 1-2 feet. Mostly sunny skies. Dry. Friday, SW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas 2-3 feet. Cloudy skies with a chance of rain. Saturday, S winds at 30-35 knots are forecast. Seas 3 feet. Cloudy skies with rain likely. [SEP] *** Original Email: Message-ID: <3E4E724B.E5F75D45@noaa.gov> Date: Sat, 15 Feb 2003 10:00:59 -0700 From: bushy <glen.watabayashi@noaa.gov> X-Mailer: Mozilla 4.79C-CCK-MCD {C-UDP; EBM-APPLE} (Macintosh; U; PPC) X-Accept-Language: en MIME-Version: 1.0 To: orr.hotline@noaa.gov, Ed Levine <Ed.Levine@noaa.gov>, Tom Callahan <Thomas.Callahan@noaa.gov>, Moon Jin Lee <MJlee@kriso.re.kr>, Steve Lehmann <Steve.Lehmann@noaa.gov> Subject: - No Selection -*Potential Traj Content-Type: multipart/mixed; Two sets or trajectories attached. One for a potential spill on Satuday and another for a potential spill on Sunday. See labels on pictures. ADIOS runs for 3 different wind conditons ... strong, stronger, and strongest. Oil Name = DIESEL/HEATING OIL NO.2, CHEVRON API = 33.5 Pour Point = 5 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 20 knots Wave Height = 3 ft Water Temperature = 32 deg F Time of Initial Release = February 15, 0900 hours Total Amount of Oil Released = 1,000,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 1,000,000 - 0 - 0 - 100 2 1,000,000 0 0 100 4 1,000,000 - 0 - 1 - 99 6 1,000,000 0 2 97 8 1,000,000 - 0 - 5 - 94 10 1,000,000 1 10 90 12 1,000,000 - 1 - 16 - 83 14 1,000,000 2 24 74 16 1,000,000 - 2 - 32 - 66 18 1,000,000 3 40 57 20 1,000,000 - 3 - 47 - 50 22 1,000,000 4 52 44
Fifth Coast Guard District requested on 3 February that NOAA provide a trajectory assessment for a gasoline barge grounded in the Chesapeake Bay at 38-12N and 75-58.8 W.  Observers on-scene had reported that the vessel was not leaking but was surrounded by broken ice.NOAA provided weather and a written trajectory estimate if gasoline would have been released from the grounded barge.  NOAA also provided a written assessment of the danger from explosion and the potential direction of the resulting smoke plume.Within several hours the barge was refloated and was moved to its destination without further incident.  The underwater survey of the bottom of the barge was unable to detect damage as a result of the grounding. [SEP] Fifth Coast Guard District requested on 3 February that NOAA provide a trajectory assessment for a gasoline barge grounded in the Chesapeake Bay at 38-12N and 75-58.8 W. Observers on-scene had reported that the vessel was not leaking but was surrounded by broken ice. NOAA responded within one hour to the Coast Guard request with local weather and a written trajectory estimate if gasoline would have been released from the grounded barge. NOAA also provided a written assessment of the danger from explosion and the potential direction of the resulting smoke plume. Within several hours the barge was refloated and was moved to its destination without further incident. The underwater survey of the bottom of the barge was unable to detect damage as a result of the grounding. Case closed. [SEP] Date: February 3 2004 at 1400 EST To: NOAA SSC Gary Ott FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Vane Brothers Fuel Barge Grounding FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Debra Simecek-Beatty, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request we have looked at trajectory implications of the gasoline that may be released from the fuel barge. These notes are based on the following information: A fuel barge carrying 26,000 barrels of gasoline has broken its tow and is currently located at 38??12???€?N, 75??58.8???€?W. Observers???€? on-scene report the vessel is not leaking but is surrounded by broken ice. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) 36 Hour Weather Forecast: Today, the winds are expected to be from the south at 10-12 knots shifting to be from the west at 10-12 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, west winds at 10-12 knots are predicted. Wednesday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to decrease to 5-10 knots by the evening hours. 2) Oil Weathering and Trajectory There is a high flammability hazard associated with gasoline spills. Specifically, if a spill is kept from spreading freely by natural or man-made structures the gasoline slick might be thick enough to support ignition. In addition, vapor concentrations near the source of the spill, vapors collected in sheltered areas or partial to empty tanks that have not been inerted, can present an explosion hazard (see Health and Safety Considerations). If an explosion were to occur on the vessel, multiple fireballs may be produced with a black smoke cloud mushrooming several hundred feet into the air. After an explosion, the hull may be ruptured with the fire spreading to the other tanks. The smoke plume may be visible up to 12 miles and, with the forecast aloft winds (west at 10-15 knots at 1000 feet), likely drift to the east. Based on the Handbook of Chemical Hazard Analysis Procedures, a risk from fragment and thermal radiation could be as much as a half to one mile. Gasoline is considered a light refined product with a specific gravity that can range from 0.76 to 0.70 at 15??C (54 to 70 API). The product typically has a very high evaporation rate and does not tend to create persistent slicks. Even under the cold-water conditions of the spill, gasoline would be expected to retain a low viscosity. Depending on the oil/ice interaction and the ice undersurface roughness, the ice may act as a barrier to the spreading of the slick with some of the oil becoming trapped on the undersurface of the ice, leading to a secondary source of sheens as the ice breaks up or melts. If a release were to occur this afternoon under the forecast westerly winds, we would expect 90% of the gasoline to evaporate within 4 hours or less, provided there is sufficient open water for the gasoline to spread to a thin sheen. We would expect the ebb tide this afternoon to transport the gasoline to the south with westerly winds moving product onshore. This afternoon, the shoreline from Hall Pt. to Little Deal Island would likely be threatened. Gasoline impacts on the shorelines may be noticeable only by a slight staining at the high tide mark (i.e., bathtub ring) or by smell. It should be noted that gasoline does have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tends to be more soluble and more toxic then heavier oils. In high-energy environments, the gasoline will likely disperse as small droplets in the water column. Gasoline spills can result in an initial toxic shock to biota and persist as a biological threat particularly in low energy marine environments as often found in shallow bays and inlets. [SEP] Hotline has been opened to capture information about the grounded Vane Brothers barge, mouth of the Wicomico River, Chesapeake Bay, MD. [SEP] Our initial resources at risk summary provides detailed information on potential resources at risk as a result of a release of diesel fuel from the VB-53. Two particular points of concern to the resposne effort is summarized below: 1. There have been no reasons identified to not move the VB-53 from the point where she is grounded to a repair facility some 5 miles upriver at the Kinder-Morgan facility. No areas along this track have been identified that would require special preventative booming strategies to be implemented. 2. The separate resources at risk document clearly identifies a potential risk to spawning fish and habitat in the area of the grounding. The need to stabilize the barge and stopping any further leaks of oil before the barge is moved is a given. Reference direct discussions with VA DGIF staff. 3. The oyster spawn is normally expected in July and August. With almost no oil from this release expected to reach critical spawning areas in the lower James River, and with the spawning season expected much later in the year, no impact on oyster spawning from this incident is expected. Reference direct discussions with VMRC staff. [SEP] VANE BROTHERS GAS BARGE, GROUNDING, CHESAPEAKE BAY 1330 EST, Tuesday, February 3, 2004 Sunset (02/03): 1729 Sunrise (02/04): 0706 Sunset (02/04): 1730 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the south at 10-12 knots shifting to be from the west at 10-12 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, west winds at 10-12 knots are predicted. Wednesday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to decrease to 5-10 knots by the evening hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Ice coverage. No observations. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, no precipitation is expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, possible fog and cloudy skies are predicted. Tonight, clear skies are forecast. Wednesday, mostly clear skies are expected. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 40???€?s to lows in the 30???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be light and variable at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the south at 10-15 knots by the afternoon hours. Mostly clear skies diminishing to cloudy skies by the evening hours. Evening rain and snow mix is predicted. Friday, S-SW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NW at 10-15 knots by the evening hours. Cloudy skies. Rain and snow mix. Saturday, NW winds at 10-15 knots are expected. Cloudy skies. Rain and snow mix.
Heavy impact on the environment and wildlife. 17.5 bbls were recovered. Wildlife rescued and under observation. [SEP] Overflight Map 2/2/03 1024 [SEP] OverflightMap 2/1/03 1310 [SEP] Overflight Map 2/1/03 0830 [SEP] Friday, Jan 31, 2003 trajectory update initialized from 1400 overflight obs. [SEP] PIPELINE RUPTURE, TERRABONE BAY, LOUISIANA 1200 CST, Saturday February 1, 2003 Sunset (2/1): 1741 Sunrise (2/2): 0651 Sunset (2/2): 1742 48 HOUR FORECAST: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the N at 5-10 knots, becoming variable at 5-10 knots in the afternoon. Tonight, variable winds at 5-10 knots are predicted, becoming SE at 5-10 knots in the early morning. Tomorrow, S winds at 5-10 knots are forecast, becoming S at 10-15 by the afternoon. _________________________ Waves: Today through tonight, the seas are expected to be 1 foot or less in the Bay. Tomorrow, the seas in the Bay are predicted to be 2 feet by the afternoon, becoming 2-3 feet Sunday night. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through tomorrow night, no precipitation is forecast. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through tomorrow, clear skies are predicted. _________________________ Temperature: The temperatures are expected to range from highs in the upper 60s to lows in the mid 40s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Monday, S winds at 15 knots are forecast, becoming SW at 20 knots in the afternoon. Monday night, NW winds at 20 knots are predicted. Seas 2-3 feet. Cloudy skies with scattered showers and thunder storms are expected. Tuesday, N winds at 20 knots are predicted. Seas 2-3 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Wednesday, NW winds at 15-20 knots are expected. Seas 2 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Thursday, E winds at 15 knots are forecast. Seas 2 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. [SEP] Friday, Jan 31, 2003 trajectory update initialized from 1400 overflight obs. [SEP] A hotline has been opened for a reported oil pipeline spill in north Terrebonne Bay Louisiana. [SEP] The attached photographs were provided by the USCG MSU Houma and show oil impacting two islands near Wine Pass. One of the islands has a large concentration of white pelicans. [SEP] The attached photographs were provided by LOSCO and taken during an afternoon overflight. [SEP] Evening Report: 30 January 2003 NOAA was notified by the USCG of a pipeline release in the NW corner of Terrebonne Bay. The 10 inch pipeline was reported to be carrying Eugene Island Crude. The location of the source is reported at 29?? 11' 57.5" N by 90?? 36' 6.6" W. A 6 mile sheen extending to the SW was reported. The actual release is, at present, unknown. The pipeline has been reported shut in, but the status of the pipeline is currently unknown. Divers have reported finding a small leak. Photographs provided by the USCG show oil impacting islands in lower Terrebone Bay that are well know bird habitat. The NOAA SSC has conferred with USFWS relative to resources at risk in the Lake Pelto and Terribonne Bay area. NOAA and USFWS are responding on-scene to support the USCG and will arrive on the morning of 31 January 2003. Additional information will follow. [SEP] PIPELINE RUPTURE, TERRABONE BAY, LOUISIANA 0710 CST, Friday January 31, 2003 Sunset (01/31): 1740 Sunrise (02/01): 0652 Sunset (02/01): 1741 Current Observations (Patterson): calm winds 36 Hour Forecast: _________________________ Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be NE at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the west at 10 knots by the afternoon hours. Tonight, west winds at 10 knots are predicted to shift and be from the north at 10 knots by the late evening hours. Saturday, north winds at 10-15 knots are forecast to decrease to 10 knots by the afternoon hours. _________________________ Precipitation: Today through Saturday, the seas are expected to be light chop to smooth. _________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today, overcast skies are predicted to break to partly cloudy skies by the late morning hours. Tonight through Saturday, clear skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be unrestricted. _________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 60???€?s to lows in the 50???€?s. _________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 5-10 knots increasing to 15 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas light chop. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Monday, SE winds at 15 knots are predicted to shift and be from the SW at 15-20 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas choppy. Mostly cloudy skies. Scattered showers and thunderstorms. Tuesday, SW winds at 15 knots are forecast to shift and be from the north at 20- 25 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas choppy to rough. Partly cloudy to mostly cloudy skies. Morning showers and thunderstorms diminishing. [SEP] The attached photographs were provided by the USCG MSU Houma and show oil impacting two islands near Wine Pass. One of the islands has a large concentration of white pelicans.
Search and rescue mission, vessel was adrift and abandoned for several weeks. NOAA provides weather and vessel trajectory until Feb 18 2003. CG Search and Rescue takes over from then. [SEP] Below is an initial report from Gary Ott, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, and updates capturing information on the M/V WHITE SEAL abandoned and drifting about 180 miles offshore of Cape Fear, NC, 24 January 2003. Date: Fri, 24 Jan 2003 12:53 From: Gary Ott MSO Wilmington reported that the vessel, WHITE SEAL, is sinking, that the crew has been taken off, and the abandoned vessel is adrift. The position of the WHITE SEAL AT 1130 hours was reported to be approx. 33- degrees N and 074-27 degrees W. MSO Wilmington will interview the crew and have more information within the hour. MSO Wilmington requested NOAA advise on offshore weather and potential trajectory of this abandoned vessel for the next 24 hours or so. ------------------------------------------- Date: Fri, 24 Jan 2003 16:23 From: Gary Ott Master of the White Seal confirmed to MSO Wilmington staff that the last position on 24 Jan at 1130 hrs EST was 33 47.2N and 074 27.0 W. Vessel was sailing from Haiti and destined to a port in Connecticut. When the vessel was abandoned it was pointed to the North. One report from the pilot had the screw turning, but the Master assured the MSO interviewers that no power was being sent to the screw. The vessel was reported to have been rolling 45 degrees before it was abandoned. The last report was that the vessel was listing 20 degrees to Starboard. [SEP] Date: February 12, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Gary Ott /Brad Benngio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: M/V White Seal FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications for a drifting vessel. These notes are based on the following information: At 1130 EDT January 24, 2003, the USCG reported a vessel drifting about 180 nautical miles east of Cape Fear (33?? 48?? N, 074?? 27??W). The ship is carrying about 80 metric tons of Bunker C (~21,500 gallons) and 5.7 metric tons of diesel (~1,700 gallons). Reported ship positions: January 26, 2003, 1405 EST : 33?? 01??N, 074?? 22??W January 29, 2003, 0054 EST: 31?? 54??N, 073?? 20??W (listing 36??) January 29, 2003, 0820 EST: 31?? 50??N, 73?? 18??W (vessel sunk down to its transom) January 30, 2003, 0800 EST: 32?? 07'N , 73?? 01' W (EPIRB placed on vessel) January 31, 2003, 1000 EST: 32?? 25.1' N, 73?? 04.8' W February 3, 2003, no time recorded: 32?? 3.6'N, 71?? 59.6' W February 6, 2003, 1100 EST: 31?? 47.8'N , 70?? 20.2' W At this time, the vessel is not leaking product. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds are expected to be 20 - 30 knots from the NW tonight becoming 15 -20 knots tomorrow and tomorrow night. Light and variable winds are expected for Friday. 2) Ship Drift Trajectory When a vessel??s propulsion or steering device fails, a ship will drift due to the combined effects of the wind, waves, current, trim, and ballast. In general, vessels will drift at 2 to 10% of the wind speed. A ship does not generally drift straight downwind, but will show a drift angle to the wind. This drift angle can vary by 60 degrees or more to the right or left. Drift analysis of the ship's positions between Feb. 3rd and Feb. 6th indicate: Windage on the vessel has been between 8% and 10 % of the wind speed. The drift angle has been between 30 and 50 degrees. Estimated ship locations from analysis: Last reported location Feb. 6, 1100 EST : 31?? 47.8'N, 70?? 20.2' W Friday, Feb. 14 at 1200 EST : 60 - 100 miles from the Feb. 6 location, ESE to S of Feb. 6 location Sunday, Feb. 16 at 1200 EST: 65 - 110 miles from the Feb. 6 location, ESE to S of Feb. 6 location Tuesday, Feb. 18 at 1200 EST: 75 - 130 miles from the Feb. 6 location, E to SSE of Feb. 6 location 3) Oil fate and behavior If the vessel remains to the east of the Gulf Stream as expected, we would not expect any oil that might be lost, to make any noticeable shoreline impacts. [SEP] M/V WHITE SEAL, SHIP ADRIFT, OFFSHORE NORTH CAROLINA 1445 EST, Wednesday February 12, 2003 Sunset (02/12): 1724 Sunrise (02/13): 0624 Sunset (02/13): 1725 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 20-30 knots. Thursday, NW winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Thursday night, NW winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Waves: Tonight through Thursday, the seas are expected to be 9-12 feet. Thursday night, 7-10 foot seas are predicted. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight, scattered showers are forecast. Thursday through Thursday night, dry weather is expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Thursday through Thursday night, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be 7+ miles except during times of rain. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 60's to lows in the 50???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are expected to be light and variable at 5-10 knots. Seas 6-9 feet. Clear to partly cloudy skies. Dry. Saturday, S-SW winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Seas 4-6 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Sunday, south winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Seas 4-6 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Morning scattered showers. Monday, SW winds at 20-30 knots are expected to shift and be from the west at 20- 25 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 9-12 feet. Mostly cloudy skies. Showers and thunderstorms. Tuesday, N-NE winds at 10 knots are predicted. Seas 5-9 feet. Mostly clear skies. Dry. [SEP] M/V WHITE SEAL, SHIP ADRIFT, OFFSHORE NORTH CAROLINA 1500 EST, Friday February 7, 2003 Sunset (02/07): 1719 Sunrise (02/08): 0629 Sunset (02/08): 1720 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the south at 20 knots shifting to be from the NW at 15-20 knots by the late evening hours. Saturday through Saturday night, NW winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. _____________________________________ Waves: Tonight, the seas are forecast to be 7-9 feet diminishing to 6-8 feet by the late evening hours. Saturday, 5-7 foot seas are expected. Saturday night, 3-5 foot seas are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Saturday night, showers and thunderstorms are expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Saturday night, mostly cloudy to cloudy skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be 7+ miles except during times of rain. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 60's to lows in the 50???€?s. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, the winds are expected to be variable at 5-10 knots shifting to be from the SW at 25-30 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 2-4 feet increasing to 4-8 feet by the afternoon hours. Mostly cloudy to cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Monday, W-SW winds at 25-35 knots are predicted to shift and be from the NW at 20-25 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 8-12 feet. Mostly cloudy to cloudy skies. Chance of showers and thunderstorms. Tuesday, NW winds at 15-25 knots are forecast. Seas 7-10 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. Wednesday, NW winds at 20-30 knots are expected. Seas 7-10 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Dry. [SEP] Ship Photos [SEP] Date: February 7, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio / Gary Ott FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: M/V White Seal FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications for a drifting vessel. These notes are based on the following information: At 1130 EDT January 24, 2003, the USCG reported a vessel drifting about 180 nautical miles east of Cape Fear (33?? 48?? N, 074?? 27??W). The ship is carrying about 80 metric tons of Bunker C (~21,500 gallons) and 5.7 metric tons of diesel (~1,700 gallons). Reported ship positions: January 26, 2003, 1405 EST : 33?? 01??N, 074?? 22??W January 29, 2003, 0054 EST: 31?? 54??N, 073?? 20??W (listing 36??) January 29, 2003, 0820 EST: 31?? 50??N, 73?? 18??W (vessel sunk down to its transom) January 30, 2003, 0800 EST: 32?? 07'N , 73?? 01' W (EPIRB placed on vessel) January 31, 2003, 1000 EST: 32?? 25.1' N, 73?? 04.8' W February 3, 2003, no time recorded: 32?? 3.6'N, 71?? 59.6' W February 6, 2003, 1100 EST: 31?? 47.8'N , 70?? 20.2' W At this time, the vessel is not leaking product. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it
Potential oil spill 14 January 2003.At 2300 on 14 January the NYSSC was notified of a potential oil releaseof 33,000 gallons of diesel oil. The bulk carrier Anthea Y ran agroundat approximately 1700 approaching its pier in Cementown, NY (on theHudson River north of Kingston). The Anthea Y is a 641 foot shipcarrying a cargo of salt. The ship berthed at the pier and was groundedthere. Four tanks were compromised during the grounding. Three of theholds were empty, one contained 33,000 gallons of diesel oil. The shipwas boomed in but no oil was reported released. The river containedabout 50% ice cover. A morning overflight detected no oil on the river.A salvage plan was implemented and oil removed from the vessel prior toattempts for refloating. The SSC provided ESI data and tide information. [SEP] Below is a report from Ed Levine, NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator, capturing information on a potential oil spill 14 January 2003. At 2300 on 14 January the NYSSC was notified of a potential oil release of 33,000 gallons of diesel oil. The bulk carrier Anthea Y ran aground at approximately 1700 approaching its pier in Cementown, NY (on the Hudson River north of Kingston). The Anthea Y is a 641 foot ship carrying a cargo of salt. The ship berthed at the pier and was grounded there. Four tanks were compromised during the grounding. Three of the holds were empty, one contained 33,000 gallons of diesel oil. The ship was boomed in but no oil was reported released. The river contained about 50% ice cover. A morning overflight detected no oil on the river. A salvage plan was implemented and oil removed from the vessel prior to attempts for refloating. The SSC provided ESI data and tide information.
On Tuesday Jan. 14, 2003 at 0900, MSO Portland reported a fishing vesselthat is aground 1.5 nautical miles north of the north jetty at the mouthof the Umpqua River. The vessel is hard aground in sand with 4000gallons of diesel on board.Two days later, the vessel was refloated. No damage to the hull and no pollution in thewater. [SEP] GROUNDED FISHING VESSEL, UMPQUA RIVER, OREGON 1400 PDT, Thursday January 16, 2003 Sunset (01/16): 1732 Sunrise (01/17): 0813 Sunset (01/17): 1734 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the E-NE at 5-10 knots. Friday, E-NE winds at 5 knots are predicted. Friday night, east winds at 10 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Waves: Tonight, the seas are expected to be 8 feet. Friday through Friday night, 7 foot seas are predicted. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Friday night, no precipitation is forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Friday night, mostly clear skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 50's to lows in the 30's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the south at 10 knots. Seas 7 feet. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Sunday, south winds at 5-10 knots are predicted to increase to 15 knots by the evening hours. Seas 7 feet. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Monday, south winds at 20-25 knots are forecast. Seas 12-13 feet increasing to 14 feet by the late afternoon hours. Overcast skies. Rain. [SEP] GROUNDED FISHING VESSEL, UMPQUA RIVER, OREGON 0940 PDT, Tuesday January 14, 2003 Sunset (01/14): 1730 Sunrise (01/15): 0814 Sunset (01/15): 1731 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 15 knots. Tonight, east winds at less than 5 knots are predicted. Wednesday, SE winds at less than 5 knots are forecast. _____________________________________ Waves: Today, the seas are expected to be 10 feet. Tonight, 9-10 foot seas are predicted. Wednesday, 7-8 foot seas are forecast. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, no precipitation is expected. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Wednesday, mostly clear skies with late night and early morning fog predicted. Visibility is forecast to be unrestricted except during times of fog. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 50's to lows in the 30's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Thursday through Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at less than 5 knots. Seas 7-8 feet. Mostly clear skies with late night and early morning fog. Dry. [SEP] See attached PDF file for more information concerning small diesel spills [SEP] GROUNDED FISHING VESSEL, UMPQUA RIVER, OREGON 0940 PDT, Tuesday January 14, 2003 _____________________________________ River Forecast (Umpqua River): Currently, the Umpqua River is flowing at 8,560 CFS with a norm flow for this time of year at 10,500 CFS. The flood stage at Elkton on the Umpqua River is 33 feet. The forecast for Elkton is as follows: Date 1/14 1/15 1/16 1/17 1/18 Gauge Height (ft) 7.6 8.8 7.5 7.0 6.5 [SEP] Initial & Final Report F/V Grounding off of Mouth of Umpqua River, OR Initial Report On Tuesday Jan. 14, 2003 at 0900, MSO Portland reported a fishing vessel that is aground 1.5 nautical miles north of the north jetty at the mouth of the Umpqua River. The vessel is hard aground in sand with 4000 gallons of diesel on board. MSO Portland requested trajectory analysis, tides for the next 48 hours, site specific weather, and an ADIOS 2 report for a potential spill from the salvage efforts of this fishing vessel. DAC was notified by phone. The region 10 RRT rep was also notified. They were not ready to attempt to refloat the vessel during the morning high tides on Wednesday Jan. 15th at 0842. On the afternoon of Thursday, Jan 16th, USCG MSO Portland called to ask for additional weather and new trajectories, if necessary based on that new weather, through Jan 20th. The SST provided them with what they asked for and Oil Fate for several wind conditions. Final Report The vessel was refloated. No damage to the hull and no pollution in the water. [SEP] Date: 0950 Jan 14, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Sarah Scherer FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential diesel spill from grounded F/V off Umpqua R., Ore. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A fishing vessel with 4,000 gallons of diesel fuel is grounded about 1.5 miles north of the jetty into the Umpqua River, Oregon. No fuel has been lost and the bottom is sand. An attempt will be made to pull the vessel off at high tide today or tomorrow. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory and oil fate estimates. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24 hour Wind Forecast NE winds becoming E and SE today and tomorrow. 2) TRAJECTORY A spill of 4,000 gallons of diesel fuel in the high energy near shore region will result in a sheen that would extend between 1/2 to 1 1/2 miles depending upon the conditions at the time of the spill and how the spill occurs. If the spill should occur under the forecast NE -E and SE winds, we would not expect any shoreline impacts. Any oil spilled under these conditions will not persist long enough for any wind switch to bring it onshore. 3) OIL FATE ADIOS II predicts that under today???€?s 15 knot winds and sea conditions, a 4,000 gallons spill of diesel will be 90% evaporated and dispersed within 3 hours. Under the 5 knot winds expected tonight and tomorrow, 90% will be evaporated and dispersed within 6 hrs. See attached PDF file for more information concerning small diesel spills.
Vessel grounded and was pulled off and refloated that same day. No products was released.NOAA provided weather and trajectory information. [SEP] Date: January 9, 2003 To: NOAA SSC Brad Benggio USCG district 7: Lcdr. Jim Elliot FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Grounded vessel Alouette Arrow FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of a possible release of oil from the grounded vessel Alouette Arrow. These notes are based on the following information: As of January 9, 2003 at 4:30pm local time, the 522' Freighter Alouette Arrow was hard aground on a soft bottom 8 miles east of Port Canaveral, FL (28?? 23.5???€?N, 80?? 25.6???€?W). The vessel was not leaking oil at this time. The vessel is carrying a cargo of wood and steel, and the following fuel oils: 111.2 metric tons (34,400 gal.) of marine diesel, 342.8 metric tons (105,700 gal.) of diesel, and 18.9 metric tons (5,300 gal.) of gas oil. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ Wind forecast: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the west at 15-20 knots increasing to 20 knots by the late evening hours. Friday, West winds at 20 knots are predicted. Friday night, West winds at 20 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NW at 15-20 knots by the late evening hours. Trajectory Analysis: The average current west of Cape Canaveral is not very strong, and is expected to be moving to the South. The predicted winds of 15-20 knots will dominate the movement of any spilled oil, moving it to the East, away from the shore. Oil fate: All three of the products listed above are fairly light and, with the predicted winds, will have a short persistence. In the event of a large release within the next 24 hours, a slick of up to 10 miles in diameter could form, but would persist for only about 24 hours, with 90% of the product either evaporated or dispersed into the water column within about 12 hours. [SEP] A photograph of the bulk carrier Alouette Arrow as she was underway in Holland on August 18th, 1999. Photograph by Wim Van Noort. From the website: http://www.vaxxine.com/jcameron/salties/a/alouettearrow/arrow.htm [SEP] GROUNDED CARGO VESSEL, OFFSHORE CAPE CANAVERAL, FLORIDA 1700 EDT, Thursday January 09, 2003 Sunset (01/09): 1759 Sunrise (01/10): 0732 Sunset (01/10): 1759 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the west at 15-20 knots increasing to 20 knots by the late evening hours. Friday, west winds at 20 knots are predicted. Friday night, west winds at 20 knots are forecast to shift and be from the NW at 15-20 knots b the late evening hours. _____________________________________ Waves: Tonight through Friday night, the seas are expected to be 5 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Friday, no precipitation is predicted. Friday night, late isolated showers are forecast. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, mostly clear skies are expected. Friday through Friday night, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be unrestricted except during times of showers. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs in the 70's to lows in the 50's. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the north at 15 knots. Seas 4-5 feet. Mostly clear skies. Dry. Sunday, N-NE winds at 15 knots are predicted. Seas 4-5 feet. Partly sunny skies becoming mostly cloudy skies by the afternoon hours. Slight chance of showers. Monday, north winds at 15-20 knots are forecast to decrease to 15 knots by the afternoon hours. Seas 4-5 feet. Overcast skies. Dry. Tuesday, north winds at 10-15 knots are expected. Seas 3-5 feet. Mostly clear skies. Dry. [SEP] A new Hotline has been opened for the cargo freighter Allouette Arrow, grounded about 8 miles southeast of Cape Canaveral, FL [SEP] On 9 January, NOAA Hazmat received a call from MSO Miami on the Cargo Freighter Allouette Arrow, grounded about 8 miles east of Port Canaveral, Fl., at position 28?? 23.5???€? N, 080?? 25.6???€? W. It was hard aground on soft bottom and carrying steel and wood, and had a potential of about 150,000 gallons of diesel fuel. NOAA Hazmat provided weather and trajectory information. A follow up determined that the vessel was pulled off and refloated on the high tide later that same day. There was no product lost. No additional assistance was requested.
On 26 December 2002 the M/V Kyowa Violet struck the northern side of the reef on the entrance to Yap Harbour. Upon discovery that the vessel had been holed, 3 nm later and 1 nm shy of the dock, the vessel turned around and headed to back to sea. Dispersants were considered. [SEP] Initial Report - M/V KYOWA VIOLET On 02 Jan 03, NOAA HAZMAT was notified by the Pacific Strike Team (PST) that the M/V KYOWA VIOLET had grounded in Yap at 0800 on 26 DEC 02. The grounding occurred in Yap Harbor near lighted beacon No. 14 on a reef but the vessel was able to free itself with damage & unknown loss of product (IFO 180) and head back out to sea. There was a request from the PST to give advice about a dispersant that the Kyowa company was planning to use to clean up some of the oil washed ashore and in the mangrove areas. They wanted to know if this was a safe chemical to use for the clean-up? The following is an excerpt from an e-mail which contains the request for information on the dispersant. ----------------------------------------------------- Kyowa did not notify EPA about the oil spill when it happened on or about the early morning hours of Thursday last week, December 26. Concerned Yapese who learned of the situation contacted EPA about the matter at about noon Thursday, hours after the spill. Based on the information our EPA office has at this point, it seems that the ship hit the northern side of the reef as it entered the mouth of the channel when entering our harbor. The ship then continued on its way to the dock, a distance of almost a mile, but realized (about over 3/4 of the way in) that it was spilling oil, so it turned around and went back and stayed miles off the reef. So, the oil probably spilled immediately after the hit and during its trip inside the harbor channel. Upon learning of the incident, EPA and other State agencies began a survey of the situation and cleaning up effort and I believe cleaning up started late Thursday, all day Friday and throughout the weekend. Our EPA have issued a clean- up order to Kyowa Friday on their immediate plan to clean up the mess and the representatives of Kyowa and other interested parties are now in Yap meeting with State agencies and assessing the situation. Survey and assessment of the damages began Thursday and have continued up to today as far as I know. Our EPA office doesn't have a clear picture yet as to the extent of the damages from the spill and amount of spill. The cleaning up effort by Yap agencies is temporary (contain and clean up whatever can be contained and cleaned up) pending Kyowa's plan and clean up work. The deadline given to Kyowa is January 2 to come up with a clean up plan. No charges have been filed yet, but it's probably best for the agencies to work with Kyowa first and see how good they handle the clean up while we are getting more accurate facts on the incident. Cleaning up, making sure that Kyowa, etc. follow the EPA order, and monitoring will continue to be done by the State agencies. A cease and desist order was given to the Kyowa parties to cease the leakage from the vessel and stay away from the island beyond the 12 miles zone but not within. The Kyowa parties including their lawyer are in Yap meeting with EPA, Attorney general and other government agencies. They are planning to repair the vessel and clean-up as soon as possible. The kyowa company people were able to assessed the damage to the ship and reported back to the government agencies. They reported that two fuel tanks and bilge tank were damaged. The Kyowa company are planning to use oil spill disperse chemical to clean up some of the oil washed ashore and in the mangrove areas. Is this a safe chemical to use for the clean-up? Could you please advice me on this so I could get back to them. I will be updating you on the spill soon. I would also like to find out if our government would be able to get an expert on oil spill to assist us here in Yap to possibly advice our agency and our government at this time. I will be contacting Guam EPA to see if anyone would be able to assist and advice our agency on this matter. Our government Disaster task force is also searching for an expert who would be able to assist our government at our government's cost. Please your advice is desperately needed at this time. Thank you and hope to hear from you soon. Thanks so much for your assistance and understanding. At this point, it may be good to share with our office any good advice that you may have. Leonard David Yinug Executive Director, Yap State EPA [SEP] MM Rock Wall Oiling [SEP] A hotline has been opened for assistance on the M/V Kyowa Violet grounded, in Yap, Federated States of Micronesia. [SEP] Reef Damage [SEP] Oiled Wrack [SEP] Kyowa Ship [SEP] Oil under Marina [SEP] On rocks surf [SEP] Recommendations for Monitoring Mangrove impacts [SEP] Oiled Lobster [SEP] Oiled Mangroves [SEP] Vac Drum Removal
F/V Mystic grounded and sinks releasing diesel oil. NOAA provides weather forecast and the impacts of a small oil spill. Follow-up on Jan 2 2003, shows debris of the ship and oil spill dissipated. [SEP] On 31 December 2002 NOAA Hazmat was notified by MSO Port Arthur of the Fishing Vessel Mystic, grounded and sheening near Sabine entrance, TX at location 29?? 40.34???€?N, 093?? 49.7???€?W, with 200 ? 300 gallons of marine diesel aboard. NOAA Hazmat provided a localized weather forecast and information on the fate and effects of small diesel spills. A follow up on 2 January 2003 determined that the vessel, which was wooden hulled, had been reduced to debris and sheening was no longer observed. No additional assistance was requested. [SEP] Photos of F/V Mystic. Received from LTJG Jennifer Hnatow, Marine Safety Office Port Arthur, TX [SEP] Photos of F/V Mystic. Received from LTJG Jennifer Hnatow, Marine Safety Office Port Arthur, TX [SEP] Information One Pager on Small Diesel Spills [SEP] F/V MYSTIC, SABINE, TEXAS 1030 CDT, Tuesday December 31, 2002 Sunset (12/31): 1727 Sunrise (1/1): 0711 Sunset (1/1): 1728 36 HOUR FORECAST: Winds: Today through tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 25-30 knots. Wednesday, the winds are forecast to be from the NW at 15-20 knots. Waves: Today through tonight, the seas are forecast to be 4-5 feet. Wednesday, the seas are expected to be 3-4 feet. Precipitation: Today through Wednesday, no precipitation is predicted. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Wednesday, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from a high near 60 to a low near 40. Extended Forecast: Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 20-25 knots. Seas 3-4 feet. Cloudy skies. No precipitation is forecast. Friday, the winds are expected to be from the NW at 15-20 knots. Seas 3-4 feet. Cloudy skies. No precipitation is forecast. [SEP] Photos of F/V Mystic. Received from LTJG Jennifer Hnatow, Marine Safety Office Port Arthur, TX [SEP] Photos of F/V Mystic. Received from LTJG Jennifer Hnatow, Marine Safety Office Port Arthur, TX [SEP] Photos of F/V Mystic. Received from LTJG Jennifer Hnatow, Marine Safety Office Port Arthur, TX [SEP] Photos of F/V Mystic. Received from LTJG Jennifer Hnatow, Marine Safety Office Port Arthur, TX
Late this afternoon (Friday, 9 Feb. 2001) a US submarine collided with a 190ft Japanese Training Vessel approximately 8-10 miles south of Waikiki Beach, Honolulu, HI (21 03.7'N/157 51.8'W). The vessel had just refueled and was carrying at least 21000 gals of diesel fuel oil. It is believed that the sub surfaced under the vessel causing it to sink in 1800ft of water. Although its likely there was a release of oil focus right now is on search and rescue. There is fear that some passengers are missing. USCG district 14. [SEP] Date: February 8, 2001 To: USCG Lt Curatilo / NOAA SSC Ken Barton FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Vessel Collision off Waikiki FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-6317. ._______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of the diesel that has been released from a sunken vessel. These notes are based on the following information: On February 8, 2001, a submarine collided with a 190' cruise ship at approximately 8 miles of Waikiki, Hawaii (21?? 03.7'N, 157?? 51.8'W). The cruise ship sank in 1800' of water and was known to be carrying 21,000 gallons of diesel. At this time, it is not known if the cruise ship is leaking product. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds are forecast from east-southeast at 10 - 20 knots through tomorrow. 2) Trajectory Analysis The surface currents in the accident area generally flow east to west. Offshore eddies are also known to occur in this area. With southeast and east-southeast winds and a westward current, we would expect oil to be transported to the west-northwest. Lighter refined products, such as diesel, typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks, particularly if the winds are greater than 10 knots. If a catastrophic release occurred, we would expect on-scene observers to report a slick extending 2 to 4 miles trending in a west-northwest direction. We would not anticipate shoreline contact from a diesel release. 3) Oil Weathering The terminology for refined products are not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as 'marine diesel'. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and form a more persistent slick. These oils don't usually form a stable emulsion. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. It is likely that 50 to 60% of the oil will evaporate in the first 12 hours of the release. Finally, lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic then heavier oils. So, even though these oils may not present an involved cleanup problem, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota. Time Total Released Evaporated Dispersed Floating hours gallons percent percent percent 0 ----- 21,000 ----- 0 ----- 0 ----- 100 3 21,000 24 6 70 6 ----- 21,000 ----- 39 ----- 16 ----- 45 9 21,000 46 26 28 12 ----- 21,000 ----- 50 ----- 34 ----- 16 15 21,000 52 39 9 [SEP] Date: February 8, 2001 To: USCG Lt Curatilo / NOAA SSC Ken Barton FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Vessel Collision off Waikiki FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-6317. ._______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked at trajectory implications of the diesel that has been released from a sunken vessel. These notes are based on the following information: On February 8, 2001, a submarine collided with a 190' cruise ship at approximately 8 miles of Waikiki, Hawaii (21?? 03.7'N, 157?? 51.8'W). The cruise ship sank in 1800' of water and was known to be carrying 21,000 gallons of diesel. At this time, it is not known if the cruise ship is leaking product. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds are forecast from east-southeast at 10 - 20 knots through tomorrow. 2) Trajectory Analysis The surface currents in the accident area generally flow east to west. Offshore eddies are also known to occur in this area. With southeast and east-southeast winds and a westward current, we would expect oil to be transported to the east-northeast. Lighter refined products, such as diesel, typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks, particularly if the winds are greater than 10 knots. If a catastrophic release occurred, we would expect on-scene observers to report a slick extending 2 to 4 miles trending in a east-northeast direction. We would not anticipate shoreline contact from a diesel release. 3) Oil Weathering The terminology for refined products are not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as 'marine diesel'. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and form a more persistent slick. These oils don't usually form a stable emulsion. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. It is likely that 50 to 60% of the oil will evaporate in the first 12 hours of the release. Finally, lighter refined products do have a relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic then heavier oils. So, even though these oils may not present an involved cleanup problem, they can result in an initial toxic shock to biota. Time Total Released Evaporated Dispersed Floating hours gallons percent percent percent 0 ----- 21,000 ----- 0 ----- 0 ----- 100 3 21,000 24 6 70 6 ----- 21,000 ----- 39 ----- 16 ----- 45 9 21,000 46 26 28 12 ----- 21,000 ----- 50 ----- 34 ----- 16 15 21,000 52 39 9 [SEP] Search and rescue for the missing passengers continues. Winds are expected to be from the E to ESE thru Sunday at about 20 knots. East-southeast to southeast winds are expected to continue into Monday with offshore wind speeds between 15 to 20 knots. Swells are expected to be from the E to SE at 3 - 4 feet. Combined seas are expected to be about 8 feet. There is some confusion over the exact lat/long of the incident. Helo overflights by the Navy at 0800 this morning report a cohesive slick extending west/southwest from this location 4 miles long x 0.5 miles wide. The center of the slick was described as heavy rainbow sheen, with the edges and downwind portion streaking and breaking up. This is consistent with the behavior predicted in the initial trajectory and the most recent weather forecast. Given the existing winds and seas, this indicates a relatively significant release is on-going from the fishing vessel. At this rate, the remaining fuel on board would be expected to end sometime today or tomorrow. With the forecasted east to southeast winds, no land impact from the slick is predicted. A second Navy overflight at approximately 1100 HST reported a slick 8 miles x .5 miles, eight to ten miles offshore, oriented in E-W direction. The following lat/longs were provided: 21-08.9 N, 157-51.5 W eastern most point 21-09.9 N, 158-00.2 W western most point 21-08.9 N, 157-56.0 W heaviest concentration SSC and HAZMAT remain on standby if any further assistance is needed. [SEP] CG HELO CG6570 COMPLETED OVERFLIGHT OF AREA AT 0925 ON SUNDAY, 11 FEB. A LIGHT TO HEAVY DIESEL SHEEN WEST OF THE COLLISION SITE WAS REPORTED EXTENDING 3.5NM FROM SE POSN 21-05.0N, 157-49.7W TO NW POSN 21-07.9N, 157-51.7W. SHEEN APPEARED TO BE DECREASING IN SIZE AND WAS APPROX 8NM SOUTH OF CLOSEST POINT OF LAND. USN P-3 ORION COMPLETED OVERFLIGHT OF AREA AT 1300 ON MONDAY, 12 FEB AND REPORTED NO VISIBLE SHEEN. USCG REPORTS THAT OVERFLIGHT OF COLLISION SITE AND AREA WEST AT 1500 ON MONDAY, 13 FEB CONFIRMED THERE WAS NO VISIBLE SHEEN. SSC AND HAZMAT HAVE BEEN STOOD DOWN. [SEP] Search and rescue for the missing passengers continues. Winds are expected to be from the E to ESE thru Sunday at about 20 knots. East-southeast to southeast winds are expected to continue into Monday with offshore wind speeds between 15 to 20 knots. Swells are expected to be from the E to SE at 3 - 4 feet. Combined seas are expected to be about 8 feet. The lat/long used in the initial trajectory has been corrected to 21?? 05'N and 157?? 49'W, a position south of Pearl Harbor. Helo overflights by the Navy this morning report a cohesive slick extending west/southwest from this location 4 miles long x 0.5 miles wide. The center of the slick was described as heavy rainbow sheen,
At 0530 on the morning of 12 September 2000 the USNavy LST La Moure County struck a submerged rock near Pta Artigas, Bahia Lavata, Chile.  This Bay is near the village of Cifuncho.  An unknown volume of fuel was released at the grounding site and subsequent anchorages in the small bay near the village of Cifuncho.  The area is locally defined as Bahia Lavata.  The initial estimate was 40,000 gallons spilled, but it was later determined that a larger volume had been lost.  The best "guess" is between 80,000 and 120,000 gallons of fuel.  While marine diesel (DFM F-76) was the dominant product spilled, several of the damaged compartments also carried JP-5 and mogas (gasoline). NOAA had two scientists on-scene to assist the US Navy in developing a proactive response strategy. [SEP] PPT of NOAA efforts
On August 14th the Coast Guard's Marine Safety Office (MSO) Hampton Roads received a report that about 1,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil had leaked from the hull of the Navy Landing Ship Dock (LSD-20) DONNER.  Boom was deployed around the DONNER to contain the release and the remaining 18,000 gallons of fuel that was in the leaking tank was transferred to other tanks in the ship.  USCG district 5.  Keyword: boom, skimmer, entrainment, Navy, MARAD, SUPSALV. [SEP] habitat [SEP] Some of the oil moved from the DONNER and past the booms into the James River. Although the oil that did escape the boomed area would have been expected to would reach the James River shoreline within hours, no shoreline oiling was report. [SEP] On August 14th the Coast Guard's Marine Safety Office (MSO) Hampton Roads received a report that about 1,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil had leaked form the hull of the Navy Landing Ship Dock (LSD-20) DONNER. Boom was deployed around the DONNER to contain the release and the remaining 18,000 gallons of fuel that was in the leaking tank was transferred to other tanks in the ship. [SEP] none [SEP] NOAA was asked by MSO Hampton Roads to analyze the possibility of the oil from the DONNER sinking and impacting sensitive oyster beds in that area of the river. A sample of the oil was obtained by MSO Hampton Roads and sent to the Institute for Environmental Studies at Louisiana State University (LSU.) LSU's report showed that this heavy fuel oil would remain floating after 24 hours of agitation and suggested that the oil tested would remain afloat if spilled into the James River. It was also reported that in the opinion of the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, oysters in the area were not affected by this small release of heavy oil. [SEP] Virginia Institute of Marine Science. 1980. Sensitivity of Coastal Environments and Wildlife to Spilled Oil, State of Virginia. Boulder Colorado: Hazardous Materials Response Project, NOAA. 104 maps. NOAA. 1993. ADIOS (Automated Data Inquiry for Oil Spills) User's Manual. Seattle: Hazardous Materials Response and Assessment Division, NOAA. 50 pp. NOAA. 1992. Shoreline Countermeasures Manual For Regional Response Team III. Seattle: Hazardous Materials Response and Assessment Division. pp. Report IES/RCAT00-10, Ghost ship oil samples, Institute for Environmental Studies, Louisiana State University, 29 August, 2000. "Ship in 'ghost fleet' leaks 1,000 gallons of oil into James," 15 August, 2000, Daily Press [SEP] fringing salt marsh
At approximately 3:15 AM on 24 Nov. 1999, a pipeline release occurred just east of East Grand Terre Island off Barataria Bay, Louisiana. The cause of the release is still under investigation. Between 850 and 1200 bbls of a deep well production oil was released. The oil was identified as MARS Blend, a relatively high sulfur, low asphaltene crude oil. The initial trajectory predicted the oil would move south of Four Bayous pass and sustained north winds would move most of the oil offshore. The winds were less than the forecast and the spill coincided with a spring tide (not the season Spring, but the description of the time in the tide cycle characterized by the greatest high and low tides, derived from spring up or rise). Much of the oil moved back into Four Bayous and Barataria Pass. The next morning. Heavy concentrations of oil were observed on shorelines and on water. The NOAA SSC participated in a morning overflight (pre-SCAT survey) on Thanksgiving morning to delineate oiled shorelines and surface oil. Heavy surface oil concentrations north of Grand Terre and south of Four Bayous Pass were identified and skimmers repositioned. Heavy oil was observed on the barrier islands of Barataria Bay. The barrier islands impacted were Elmer's Island, Grand Isle, Grand Terre, and East Grand Terre. The latter two were the heaviest impacted and the most remote (no road access). Stranded oil was heaviest near the passes and on the eastern end of each island. At least one marina at Grand Isle was impacted. By Friday (two days after the spill), overflights looked encouraging. Very little oil was visually observed on the beaches and on-water sheens were significantly reduced; unfortunately, most of the oil was buried by depositional sand and the lower tide level was preventing remobilization of stranded oil. The SCAT team used the aerial pre-SCAT survey to aid shoreline assessments since the heavily oiled beach areas were previously identified, but now mostly hidden by over-laying sand. SCAT was an essential element in the response and used by the Unified Command to define areas which required cleanup as well as monitoring cleanup activities to insure that the cleanup recommendations were both adequate and adhered to by field crews. More than 100 cleanup works were engaged in this response. Cleanup objectives and endpoints were developed within the SCAT organization. SCAT recommendations developed a balance between preserving beach sand (a valued state resource) and minimizing potential environmental threats. At the end of the day (Sunday, 28 Nov.), only five sites are still being cleaned. Of particular interest are a small marsh on the interior of East Grand Terre and a Gobi revetment (riprap) along the Conoco facility on the north side of Grand Isle (see Hotline #15 pictures, EGT and GIC, respectively). Both sites contain free oil. Both sites present unique cleanup problems. The interior marsh is highly isolated and composed of very soft sediments which restrict access without causing environmental injury. Each of the Gobi blocks is an Ïegg crate-like" structure with spaces which hold trapped fluid oil. USCG district 8. [SEP] Pictures of the impacted interior marsh at East Grand Terre (EGT) and the industrial/marina area behind Grand Isle (GIC), Louisiana. All pictures taken by NOAA SSC. [SEP] Pictures of the impacted interior marsh at East Grand Terre (EGT) and the industrial/marina area behind Grand Isle (GIC), Louisiana. All pictures taken by NOAA SSC. [SEP] Pictures of the impacted interior marsh at East Grand Terre (EGT) and the industrial/marina area behind Grand Isle (GIC), Louisiana. All pictures taken by NOAA SSC. [SEP] Time Total Released Evaporated Dispersed Floating hours barrels percent percent percent 0 ----- 0 ----- 0 ----- 0 ----- 100 3 850 12 0 88 6 ----- 850 ----- 17 ----- 0 ----- 83 9 850 20 0 80 12 ----- 850 ----- 22 ----- 0 ----- 78 15 850 24 0 76 18 ----- 850 ----- 26 ----- 0 ----- 74 21 850 27 0 73 24 ----- 850 ----- 28 ----- 0 ----- 72 27 850 29 0 71 30 ----- 850 ----- 30 ----- 0 ----- 70 33 850 31 0 69 36 ----- 850 ----- 32 ----- 0 ----- 68 39 850 32 0 68 42 ----- 850 ----- 33 ----- 0 ----- 67 45 850 34 0 66 48 ----- 850 ----- 34 ----- 0 ----- 66 54 850 35 0 65 60 ----- 850 ----- 36 ----- 0 ----- 64 66 850 36 0 64 72 ----- 850 ----- 37 ----- 1 ----- 62 78 850 37 1 62 84 ----- 850 ----- 38 ----- 1 ----- 61 90 850 38 1 61 96 ----- 850 ----- 38 ----- 1 ----- 61 102 850 39 1 60 108 ----- 850 ----- 39 ----- 1 ----- 60 114 850 39 1 60 120 ----- 850 ----- 40 ----- 2 ----- 58 [SEP] Pictures of the impacted interior marsh at East Grand Terre (EGT) and the industrial/marina area behind Grand Isle (GIC), Louisiana. All pictures taken by NOAA SSC. [SEP] Trajectory estimates for 11/25 based on overflight one on the afternoon of the 24th and NWS forecast. [SEP] Pictures of the impacted interior marsh at East Grand Terre (EGT) and the industrial/marina area behind Grand Isle (GIC), Louisiana. All pictures taken by NOAA SSC. [SEP] Offshore Resources at Risk, Quatre Bayoux Pass Spill, LA Nearshore and offshore sensitive resources in the area include penaeid shrimp, blue crabs, and several finfish species. Major commercial harvests and some spawning sites for fisheries species occur in the area. Endangered sea turtles and bottlenose dolphins are also likely to occur in the area. Major year-round nursery areas for Kemp's ridley sea turtles occur within Barataria Bay and in nearshore waters, as well as along a large portion of the Gulf Coast. All the resources mentioned above are widespread along the coast, and are not specifically limited to marine waters off Barataria Bay. [SEP] Weather for Pipeline Spill in Four Pass, La. 0900 CST, Wednesday, November 24, 1999 Sunrise (11/24):0631 (CST) Sunset (11/24):1702 Sunrise (11/25):0632 Sunset (11/25):1702 36 hour Forecast: Winds: Wednesday AM: Winds are expected to be from the north at 5 - 10 knots thru mid morning becoming stronger from the north by late morning. Wednesday PM: Winds are expected to remain from the north increasing to 15 - 20 knots late tonight and into Thursday morning. Thursday: Winds are expected to remain from the north at 15 - 20 knots thru Thursday. Waves: 1-2 feet for nearshore waters this morning increasing this aftenoon. Offshore waters are expected to have seas 5 - 7 feet with the increasing winds tonight. Precipitation: Chance of scattered showers today and tomorrow. Temperature: Wednesday : Highs in the low 70s, Lows in the low 50s Thursday : Highs in the 60s, Lows in the low 50s Extended Forecast: Winds are expected to remain from the North and Northeast into next week. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Quatre Bayoux Pass, Louisiana I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared on November 24, 1999. Information in the report is based on the assumption that a pipeline spill of 850 bbls of an unknown crude oil occurred at a 29 21' 30" N latitude and 89 53' 32"W longitude in the Quatre Bayoux Pass in Barataria Bay. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by this report includes the immediate vicinity around the spill site in Quatre Bayoux Pass. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports for oil location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material The spilled product is a medium-light crude oil. This oil would be expected to impact intertidal resources and biological organisms that occur on or at the water surface, primarily through physical fouling or coating. In addition, depending on wave conditions and the amount of spilled oil, acutely toxic water column impacts could also occur, especially, if large amounts of oil accumulate in shallow areas and/or areas with restricted water circulation. IV. Resources at Risk Salt marshes are the predominant shoreline type in the area. Small tidal flats may be present among the marshes. Outer coast shorelines along the exposed side of the barrier islands may contain some sand beach and overwash areas. Marshes are extremely sensitive to oil contamination. Marsh vegetation could experience severe stress or mortality if oiled, especially if oil penetrates or becomes mixed into the sediments. Any cleanup in marsh areas should avoid physical disturbance to the vegetation and substrate, especially any activities that could result in oil becoming mixed into the sediments, including foot traffic. Tidal mudflats are also very sensitive during spills. Numerous commercial and recreational fish are likely to be found throughout the spill area, including red drum (may be spawning), gulf menhaden, sheepshead, sand seatrout, spotted seatrout, spot, croaker, black drum, striped mullet, and southern flounder. Adults and/or juveniles of most species may be present during this time of year. Larvae and juveniles are most at risk to
At 0930, 18 November 1999, the cement carrier M/V Sergo Zakariadze ran aground at the entrance to San Juan Harbor, Puerto Rico. The actual amount of fuel and lube oil onboard is unknown, however the vessel's fuel oil capacity is 480,000 gallons and lube oil capacity is 30,000 gallons. At this time, it is not known if the vessel is leaking petroleum product. No sheens have been reported. The vessel has sustained hull damage to three ballast tanks and the engine room. The vessel is currently exposed to eight foot seas and is being pushed against the rocks. There are three tugs made fast at this time. USCG district 7. [SEP] MV ZAKARIADZE 1200 AST, Monday January 31, 2000 Sunset (1/31): 1818 Sunrise (2/1): 0658 Sunset (2/1): 1818 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the east at 15 knots. Waves: Today through tonight: Near shore seas are predicted to be 4-6 feet with NE swells and 8-10 foot breakers. Tuesday: Near shore seas are forecast to be 5-7 feet with east swells and 10-13 foot breakers. Precipitation: Today through tonight, widely scattered showers are expected. Tuesday, scattered showers are predicted. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tuesday, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be 7-10 miles. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70's. Extended Forecast: Wednesday through Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the east at 20 knots. Seas less than 6 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Isolated showers. The next weather update: 2/1/00 1330 AST [SEP] MV ZAKARIADZE 1200 AST, Monday January 24, 2000 Sunset (1/24): 1814 Sunrise (1/25): 0700 Sunset (1/25): 1814 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through tonight, the winds are expected to be from the east at 12-15 knots. Tuesday, E-SE winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Waves: Today through tonight: Near shore seas are forecast to be 8-10 feet with north swells. Tuesday: Near shore seas are expected to be 6-8 feet diminishing to 6 feet by the afternoon hours. Swells from the north. Precipitation: Today, brief light afternoon showers are predicted. Tonight, dry weather is forecast. Tuesday, afternoon rain and isolated thunderstorms are expected. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Tuesday, partly cloudy skies are forecast. Temperatures: The temperatures are expected to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70's. Extended Forecast: Wednesday, the winds are expected to be from the SE at 10-15 knots. Seas 4-6 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Widely scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms. Thursday, east winds at 10-15 knots are predicted. Seas 3-5 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Widely scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms. The next weather update: 1/25/00 1330 AST [SEP] MV ZAKARIADZE 1330 AST, Thursday December 30 1999 Sunset (12/30): 1758 Sunrise (12/31): 0656 Sunset (12/31): 1759 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the east at 15 knots and gusty. Tonight through Friday, east winds at 15-20 knots are predicted. Waves: Today through Friday: Near shore seas are forecast to be 4-6 feet with east swells. Precipitation: Today through tonight, isolated showers are expected. Friday, scattered to numerous showers are predicted. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, mostly cloudy skies are forecast. Visibility is expected to be 7-10 miles except during times of rain. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70's. Extended Forecast: Saturday through Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the E-NE at 20 knots. Seas 5-7 feet with E-NE swells. Partly cloudy skies. Isolated showers. The next weather update: 1/3/00 1330 AST [SEP] MV ZAKARIADZE 1200 AST, Wednesday February 9, 2000 Sunset (2/9): 1823 Sunrise (2/10): 0655 Sunset (2/10): 1823 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the E to SE at 15-20 knots. Waves: Today through Thursday, near shore seas are predicted to be 4-6 feet with E to NE swells. Precipitation: Today through Thursday, isolated showers are expected. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Thursday, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be 7-10 miles except during periods of precipitation. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70's. Extended Forecast: Friday, with the passage of a front the winds are forecast to be from the E at 15-20 knots. Seas are forecast to be 6-8 feet. Saturday and Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the E at 15-20 knots. Partly cloudy skies are expected with scattered showers. [SEP] MV ZAKARIADZE 1200 AST, Wednesday March 15, 2000 Sunset (3/15): 1834 Sunrise (3/16): 0631 Sunset (3/16): 1835 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Thursday, the winds are forecast to be from the E at 15-20 knots with gust to 25 knots. Waves: Today, near shore seas are predicted to be 5-7 feet. Tonight through Thursday, the near shore seas are expected to be 6-8 feet. Precipitation: Today through Thursday, widely scattered showers are forecast in the region. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Thursday, mostly sunny skies are predicted. Visibility is forecast to be 7-10 miles. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70's. Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are forecast to be from the E at 15-20 knots. Seas are predicted to be 6-8 feet. Sunny skies are expected with widely scattered showers. Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the E at 15-20 knots. Seas are forecast to be 6-8 feet. Sunny skies are forecast with widely scattered showers. [SEP] MV ZAKARIADZE 1200 AST, Thursday March 2, 2000 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots. Tonight, NE winds at 5-10 knots are predicted. Friday, N-NE winds at 10-15 knots are forecast. Waves: Today: Near shore seas are expected to be 6-7 feet with NE swells. Tonight: Near shore seas are predicted to be 7-8 feet with NW swells. Friday: Near shore seas are forecast to be 8 feet subsiding to 7 feet by the late afternoon hours. Precipitation: Today, isolated showers are expected. Tonight through Friday, widely scattered showers are predicted. Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, partly cloudy to mostly clear skies are expected. Visibility is forecast to be 7-10 miles. Temperatures: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the 80's to lows in the 70's. Extended Forecast: Saturday through Sunday, the winds are expected to be from the east at less than 20 knots. Seas less than 6 feet. Partly cloudy to mostly clear skies. Dry. The next weather update: 3/3/00 1330 AST [SEP] Evening Report Incident MV S. Zakariadze, San Juan, PR 19 November 1999 Situation: The vessel remains grounded off the El Morro Castle in San Juan. It is estimated that the hull is 2/3 grounded with the aft 1/3 of the ship floating free in shallow water. The stern of the ship is taking the brunt of the heavy seas and concern exist that significant structural damage could occur. The diesel fuel, stored in the aft section of the ship currently posses the greatest risk of spilling should the tanks in the aft section develop cracks. The engine room of the ship is flooding with sea water. As the ship's engine room continues to leak seawater, portable pumps are being used to transfer this water, which is contaminated with some oil into the #7 cargo hold. It is anticipated that eventually, this hold will be completely filled and the water will then have to be offloaded to allow continued dewatering of the engine room. Planning has been asked to evaluate the release of this contact water. Planning will coordinate with operations and request assistance from EPA for developing a plan for this, to focus on possibly pumping this water over the side. This issue will be discussed tomorrow during an RRT conference call. So far, the forward sections of the vessel appear to be intact with no leak in the IFO tanks or the holds containing the cement cargo. Samples of the diesel and IFO were taken from the vessel and shipped to LSU via airport counter to counter for characterization and dispersant effectiveness evaluation analysis. The NOAA SSC has been designated by the FOSC as the planning section chief for the ICS. Planning began preparing the CRRT Dispersant Use Checklist and developing a report for the RRT to consider approving the use of dispersants. Corexit 9500 has been ordered and should be on-scene by 2200 tonight (11/19). A dispersant application aircraft has been made available and will be on standby in the event of a large oil release. Smaller surgical use of dispersants using a ship' fire monitor or other similar delivery system is being evaluated in the event of a smaller release during planned lightering operations. Lightering operations are planned for tomorrow. A 3500 gallon capacity tug is to be used to begin offloading the IFO. Approximately 75 response personnel are on scene currently from Federal, State, Contractor and
At 0900 PST on February 4, 1999, the M/V New Carissa, a 639-foot bulk freight ship of Panamanian registry, went hard aground in heavy seas about 150 yards off a stretch of remote, undeveloped sandy beach three miles north of Coos Bay, Oregon. Heavy surf and high winds throughout the next several days made boarding the vessel difficult and dangerous. While the preferred option was to salvage the vessel with the oil on board, the Unified Command requested that contingency plans for vessel lightering, cleanup and pollution response be developed. The longer the ship remained grounded, the greater the risk of it leaking its load of nearly 400,000 gallons of fuel oil. Moreover, a small group of endangered snowy plover was located approximately 800 yards south of the vessel. In fact, on February 8, shipboard personnel observed oil burping out alongside the ship from a small crack in the hull and on the beach near the ship. On February 9, a tug tried to pull the ship off the beach. But by then winds and waves had driven the New Carissa approximately 600 feet further shoreward, beyond the operational reach of the salvage vessel and its ability to safely anchor near the surf zone. The bow section was towed and sunk on March 11, 1999 in 1,811 fathoms of water 282 nautical miles off the Oregon coast. 58 Federal, state, county, and local agencies took part in the month-long response. NOAA, Oregon Fish and Wildlife, Oregon Parks and Recreation, DOI Bureau of Land Management, U. S. Fish and Wildlife, U. S. Forest Service, Oregon Dunes National Recreation Area and South Slough National Estuarine Research Reserve identified and prioritized sensitive environments potentially at risk. A total of 537 birds died (239 oiled; no endangered snowy plovers), with 201 birds at the rehabilitation center (172 oiled; no snowy plovers) as of March 1999. Media interest remains high. Thirteen months after the spill, NOAA and the Coast Guard continue to maintain the following incident web sites, which contain public press release information, Coast Guard pollution reports, and digital photographs: http://www.uscg.mil/d13/units/grunbend/airstation/grounding http://www.uscg.mil/d13/dpa/news As of March 8, 2000, these web sites had totalled over 45,800 hits. USCG district 13. Keyword: In-situ burning, salvage, endangered species. [SEP] EVENING REPORT 18 Feb 99 Current Situation: The M/V NEW CARISSA remains broken and aground north of Coos Bay. NOAA continues to provided the Unified Command technical assistance relative to wreck removal and the lightering. The USCG Pacific Strike Team is staging equipment to begin the lightering operation tomorrow night or Saturday morning. Eight Baker tanks (heated) are being staged in the fore dune area adjacent to the NEW CARISSA bow. Bunker from the No. 2 fuel tank will be pumped to the Baker tanks. Once lightering is completed, the bunker will be moved out of the dunes for final disposal. Several options are being considered by BLM for this operation including transferring the bunker to smaller tanks and helo lifting them out of the dunes. Lightering plans were coordinated with NOAA, DOI, BLM and ODEQ trustee reps. When the weather window is right, salvers will again attempt to put a line between the bow of the wreck and the salvage vessel and tow the vessel offshore. The latest weather forecast suggest that an attempt may be possible on Sunday. Environmental Report: SCAT and wildlife assessment operations were conducted during the morning low tide; afternoon wildlife surveys were canceled due to weather. Approximately 17 miles of beach were surveyed by three SCAT teams. Consistent with yesterdays report, widely scattered tar balls were observed. NOAA participated in a SCAT survey of Coos Bay south of Empire; only a few scattered tarballs were observed. SCAT surveys will stand down tomorrow. Wildlife surveys will include tarball observation during their assessments and report back on any significant concentrations of oil. A standby SCAT team is available to follow up on these reports as necessary. The primary cleanup technique continues to be manual removal of scattered tar balls and tar patties. Overflights: No overflights due to poor weather conditions. Wildlife Report: A total of 33 shorebirds have been received for rehabilitation; 4 have died. Snowy Plover monitoring continues. Fourteen oiled snowy plovers remain in rehab; wildlife survey teams continue to monitor 12 oiled snowy plovers remaining on the shoreline. No new oiling of snowy plovers was reported by survey teams today. Fishery Closure: Recreational shellfish harvesting remains closed in Douglas and Coos County. NOAA continues to assist the Oregon Department of Agriculture with technical information related to seafood oil contamination. Plans for Tomorrow: NOAA will continue coordination with the RPs spill management team and trustees on cleanup issues and continue to work as part of the FOSC's incident command staff to evaluate spill response issues. NOAA PERSONNEL ON SCENE Sharon Christopherson Renn Hanson Debra Simecek-Beatty (will be released tomarrow) Charlie Henry Scott Weishaar, NWS (released at end of day) [SEP] Evening Report 25 Feb 99 Situation Update: The M/V NEW CARISSA remains broken on the Oregon coast. Towing ops were halted this afternoon due to rough seas and waning daylight. The tug Sea Victory remains outside the Bay, hove to in the seas to await first daylight. A messenger line passed to the bow section this morning remains secured, attached to the hawser faked out on the beach. A team of 4 workers put onboard the bow section this morning helped secure a line to the aft portion of the bow section, with its bitter end secured to a CAT on the beach. The strain put on this line, along with the minimal amount of ballast water left in the aft-most section, should help to pivot the bow around to face offshore once towing has started. The tug Sea Victory remained offshore all night last night and made several attempts this afternoon to set her anchors. Smit decided by late afternoon the seas were too rough to have workers on the fantail to secure the bitter end of the airlifted hawser, and postponed salvage operations for the night. The next high tide is about 0830 tomorrow morning and attempts will be reinitiated to take advantage of the high water. Morning Overflight: NOAA participated in a morning overflight with the co-SSC, an ITOPF representative, and the Ops section chief. Observations made from the helicopter at very low altitude near the vessel sections noted no visible tarballs or sheens. Surveys of the coastline from the entrance to Coos Bay north to just north of Umpqua River revealed no tar balls or sheens visible on water or the shoreline. One dead seal was observed about 0.25 nm north of Horsfall beach and was reported to the Wildlife unit. Observations of river plumes and outfalls confirmed a northerly longshore current. Environmental Report: Two SCAT teams were deployed today to survey any further shoreline impact. Several teams of ODFW biologists working north of Florence were trained to perform cursory shoreline oiling assessments during their wildlife oiling surveys. These trained crews allowed for assessment beyond 50 miles north of the command post. Tarballs continue to wash ashore, but they are of small diameter, widely scattered and the bulk of them are fairly weathered. Numerous representative samples have been collected and plans are underway to "fingerprint" the product. Wildlife Report: A total of 111 birds have been turned into the morgue; of these 44 are visibly oiled. A total of 57 birds have entered the rehabilitation center; of these 49 were oiled. A total of 24 have been released from rehabilitation. A total of 15 snowy plovers remain in rehabilitation. The snowy plover target for capture yesterday, was captured today and taken to rehabilitation. Fishery Closure: Recreational and commercial shellfish harvesting remains closed in Douglas and Coos County. NOAA continues to assist the Oregon Department of Agriculture with technical information related to seafood oil contamination. No date for possible reopening is known. Plans for Tomorrow: NOAA will continue coordination with the RPs spill management team and trustees on cleanup issues and continue to work as part of the FOSC's incident command staff to evaluate spill response issues. In addition, NOAA will continue to provide support for the incident specific web page. The follow-up meeting with State and Federal stake-holders is still planned for Friday to identify a work group to continue defining the long-term cleanup process and criteria. The co-SSC will participate in a SCAT team tomorrow. Demobilization efforts continue, with a larger number of command post personnel expected to depart over the weekend. NOAA PERSONNEL ON SCENE: Charlie Henry SSC Heather Parker-Hall co-SSC Greg Sameulson Info Mgmt Specialist CONTACT INFO: Command Post (541) 888-5601, 6801, 8480 Red Lion Inn (541) 267-4141 [SEP] Attached are the photos taken by the USCG on the afternoon of 03/06. They are saved in JPEG format. For those reading this message via FirstClass Client software: Mac users: Option-double-click to view, print, or save the attached JPEG files. Windows users: Control-double click to view or download the attached JPEG files. Photo key: 990306_1.jpg-Helicopter slinging towline 990306_2.jpg-Cleanup
NOAA SSC and information management support from GenWest was requested on scene by USCG FOSC from MSO San Juan. MSO San Juan is currently involved in several responses actions as a result of Hurricane Georges impact on the island. These response actions included a pipeline break where 5,000-7,000 gals. of fuel oil entered an area of mangroves. Reportedly Puerto Rico DNER and the Army Corps of Engineers have issued permits to allow cleaning in the mangrove areas. Additionally a dry docked vessel broke free during the storm and sank in the middle of San Juan harbor. This vessel has 250 tons of IFO 180, and 30 tons of lube oil aboard. Also a U. S. Customs vessel with 5000 gals of diesel aboard is grounded on shore. At Roosevelt Roads a Navy vessel is partially submerged with 2000 gals of diesel and 200 gals. of lube oil. An aircraft is down in an inaccessible area near the San Juan Airport with 600 gals. of aviation fuel and hydraulic aboard. USCG district 7. Keyword: bioremediation, potential spill, salvage. [SEP] The Coastal Area Contingency Plan for Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands, NOAA. 1993. Shoreline Countermeasures Manual: Tropical Coastal Environments. Seattle: Office of Ocean Resources Conservation and Assessment, NOAA. 102 pp. NOAA. 1994. Results of shoreline cleaning agent testing during the Morris J. Berman Spill, Puerto Rico. HAZMAT Report 94-7. Seattle: Hazardous Materials Response and Assessment Division, NOAA. 10 pp + appendix. NOAA. 1994. Shio. Tide computer program (prototype). Seattle: Hazardous Materials Response and Assessment Division, NOAA. NOAA Hotline #333, 25 Reports NOAA Nautical charts USCG POLREPS for the Post Hurricane Georges Response, [SEP] Attached files are from the executive briefing package prepared for Admiral Loy the Commandant of the Coast Guard who visited the scene 01 OCT 98. For those reading this message via FirstClass Client software: Mac users: Option-double-click to view, print, or save the attached PICT files. Windows users: Control-double click to view or download the attached PICT files. File key: EXBRF_01. PICT - Cover Page EXBRF_02. PICT - Impacts to Puerto Rico EXBRF_03. PICT - Impacts to MSO San Juan EXBRF_04. PICT - Command Objectives EXBRF_05. PICT - Incident Information and Index EXBRF_06. PICT - Caribbean Petroleum Refinery Spill EXBRF_07. PICT - DC-3 Aircraft Crash EXBRF_08. PICT - M/V Rio Neveri Grounding EXBRF_09. PICT - Navy Vessel YFU-83 Sinking EXBRF_10. PICT - M/V El Porton Grounding EXBRF_11. PICT - Salinas Area Small Boat Sinkings EXBRF_12. PICT - Isleta Marina Boat House Collapse EXBRF_13. PICT - Island-wide Small Boat Sinkings/Groundings EXBRF_14. PICT - Weather [SEP] Attached files are from the executive briefing package prepared for Admiral Loy the Commandant of the Coast Guard who visited the scene 01 OCT 98. For those reading this message via FirstClass Client software: Mac users: Option-double-click to view, print, or save the attached PICT files. Windows users: Control-double click to view or download the attached PICT files. File key: EXBRF_01. PICT - Cover Page EXBRF_02. PICT - Impacts to Puerto Rico EXBRF_03. PICT - Impacts to MSO San Juan EXBRF_04. PICT - Command Objectives EXBRF_05. PICT - Incident Information and Index EXBRF_06. PICT - Caribbean Petroleum Refinery Spill EXBRF_07. PICT - DC-3 Aircraft Crash EXBRF_08. PICT - M/V Rio Neveri Grounding EXBRF_09. PICT - Navy Vessel YFU-83 Sinking EXBRF_10. PICT - M/V El Porton Grounding EXBRF_11. PICT - Salinas Area Small Boat Sinkings EXBRF_12. PICT - Isleta Marina Boat House Collapse EXBRF_13. PICT - Island-wide Small Boat Sinkings/Groundings EXBRF_14. PICT - Weather [SEP] NOAA provided on-scene support for this response from September 28 through October 3, 1998. The SSC worked closely with USCG, PRDNER, PR Environmental Quality Board (EQB), EPA, and USFWS to coordinate scientific and technical input used for the response. The SSC served as the lead for technical specialist within the Incident Command System (ICS) with the assistance of an information management specialist provided by NOAA. HAZMAT's MASS provided weather forecasts during the response. The SSC worked closely with NOAA HAZMAT resources at risk support to evaluate marsh cleanup options for the Caribbean Petroleum Refinery spill and to develop sound cleanup recommendations for the USCG and EPA. NOAA will lead a scientific monitoring study of the impacted wetland to observe vegetation recovery and assess the need for further cleanup actions. NOAA HAZMAT's Safety Officer worked with the USCG's Safety Officer on-scene to develop safety plans for the various incidents being addressed. NOAA provided information for local resources at risk and coordinated with other local trustees and stakeholders to ensure all resource concerns were identified. Together with the USCG and USFWS, the SSC conducted an overflight of the south coast of Puerto Rico to evaluate response priorities and verify several reports of vessel sinkings. NOAA provided information management, distribution, and documentation assistance during the response on-scene and provided an executive summary of the response for Admiral Loy, Commandant, USCG. [SEP] The attached files are updates and additions to the executive brief for USCG Commandant Loy (see Hotline #10) presented as press material 02 OCT 98. For those reading this message via FirstClass Client software: Mac users: Option-double-click to view, print, or save the attached PICT files. Windows users: Control-double click to view or download the attached PICT files. File key: EXBR10V2. PICT - M/V El Porton Grounding EXBR11V2. PICT - Salinas Area Small Boat Sinkings EXBRF_15. PICT - Fajardo Marina Boat Sinkings/Groundings EXBRF_16. PICT - Ponce Yacht Club Boat Sinkings/Groundings EXBRF_17. PICT - Guanica Bay Boat Sinkings/Groundings [SEP] HURRICANE GEORGES SPILL 0600 AST, Monday October 5, 1998 Sunrise (10/5): 0650 Sunset (10/5): 1847 Sunrise (10/6): 0650 Sunset (10/6): 1846 36 HOUR FORECAST: WINDS: Today through tonight, the winds are expected to be from the N-NE at 15-20 knots. Tuesday, N-NE winds at 15 knots are predicted. WAVES: Today, 6-7 foot seas are forecast. Tonight, 5-7 foot seas are expected. Tuesday, 5-6 foot seas are predicted. PRECIPITATION: Today through Tuesday, widely scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms are forecast. CEILING/VISIBILITY: Today through Tuesday, partly cloudy to mostly sunny skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted except during times of rain. TEMPERATURE: The temperatures throughout this forecast are expected to range from highs in the 90's to lows in the 70's. EXTENDED FORECAST: Wednesday through Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the N-NE at 10-15 knots. Seas 6 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Widely scattered showers are predicted. Friday, north winds at 10 knots are forecast. Seas 6-8 feet. Increasing chance of shower activity. Tropical Outlook: A tropical wave in the Atlantic has the potential to develop into a tropical storm. If this development takes place, then the storm is forecast to move north of the Caribbean area and not effect the spill region.HURRICANE GEORGES SPILL 0600 AST, Monday October 5, 1998 Sunrise (10/5): 0650 Sunset (10/5): 1847 Sunrise (10/6): 0650 Sunset (10/6): 1846 36 HOUR FORECAST: WINDS: Today through tonight, the winds are expected to be from the N-NE at 15-20 knots. Tuesday, N-NE winds at 15 knots are predicted. WAVES: Today, 6-7 foot seas are forecast. Tonight, 5-7 foot seas are expected. Tuesday, 5-6 foot seas are predicted. PRECIPITATION: Today through Tuesday, widely scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms are forecast. CEILING/VISIBILITY: Today through Tuesday, partly cloudy to mostly sunny skies are expected. Visibility is predicted to be unrestricted except during times of rain. TEMPERATURE: The temperatures throughout this forecast are expected to range from highs in the 90's to lows in the 70's. EXTENDED FORECAST: Wednesday through Thursday, the winds are expected to be from the N-NE at 10-15 knots. Seas 6 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Widely scattered showers are predicted. Friday, north winds at 10 knots are forecast. Seas 6-8 feet. Increasing chance of shower activity. Tropical Outlook: A tropical wave in the Atlantic has the potential to develop into a tropical storm. If this development takes place, then the storm is forecast to move north of the Caribbean area and not effect the spill region. [SEP] The USCG, USFWS and NOAA conducted an overflight of the south coast of Puerto Rico today (Friday, 02 OCT 98). Sunken and grounded boats were observed at Salinas, Ponce and Guanica Bay. No pollution was observed. [SEP] The attached files are digital photographs taken by the USFWS of the Caribbean Petroleum Refinery site on 10/02/98. For those reading this message via FirstClass Client software: Mac users: Option-double-click to view, print, or save the attached JPEG files. Windows users: Control-double click to view or download the attached JPEG files. Photo key: MVC032.JPG - Caribbean Petroleum Refinery cleanup effort observed during overflight. MVC045.JPG - Trampling of the site from aggressive cleanup efforts. Post Hurricane Georges Response, Puerto Rico SSC Evening Report Friday, 2 October 1998 Situation The NOAA SSC and representatives from USFWS, and the USCG went on an overflight today to check some of the marina sites and other potential areas where spills may have occurred during the storm. Sunken small boats were observed at Salinas, Ponce, and Guanica. No pollution was observed in the water however. USCG is still actively investigating reported
On May 9, 1996, the 846-foot T/V Anitra, carrying 41.9 million gallons of crude oil, reported approximately 200 gallons of oil bubbling from below her waterline. The vessel was anchored at Big Stone Anchorage in Delaware Bay. The on-scene weather was light winds, air temperature 49?F, with overcast skies and calm seas. The DBRC's two skimmers, Del River and Del Bay, and the National Response Corporation (NRC) skimmer Patriot response vessels, dispatched to the scene, boomed off the vessel and began skimming operations. Initially, it was believed that the oil was leaking from the sea chest, indicating the possibility that cargo was leaking into the ballast water piping. Observers on an overflight the next morning reported a steady stream of product extending from the vessel's stern to sea in a south-southeast direction for 3.5 miles, followed by a 3.8-mile sheen. After the first day, the estimate of oil spilled was raised to approxiñmately 10,000 gallons; after 10 days the estimate was 42,000 gallons. Diver surveys were conducted to identify the source of the leak. Approximately 600 barrels of an oil/water mixture were recovered by skimmers. USCG district 5. Keyword: endangered species, shallow water recovery, skimmers, tourism losses, Tri-State Bird Rescue. [SEP] The effects of this spill to tourism and recreation areas were of high concern due to the proximity to the Memorial Day weekend. The New Jersey beach towns that were impacted are financially dependent on beach tourism for the majority of their income. Beaches were never closed during this incident. Wildlife impacts and rehabilitation were the other key issues faced by the Unified Command. Delaware Bay is a major migratory stop-off point for the spring migration (millions of birds arrive at the end of May) and the endangered piping plover and threatened least tern nest on New Jersey beaches. Tri-State Bird Rescue cleaned about 20 oiled piping plovers. There were no reports of dead wildlife. Effects to human health and safety were an issue for the workers due to heat stress. Some days the temperature was over 90 degrees. Work crews were monitored for heat stress. A test plow/tilling of a high tarball concentration area along the high-tide line in Ocean City, New Jersey was conducted. NOAA informed the Unified Command that this was a temporary solution, in that once the tide began to rise to the levels where the oil was laid down they may observe frothy oil/water and/or more tarballs. The tilling was done to remove the oil from the surface so birds and people would not come in contact with it and to attempt to increase natural degradation. Nevertheless, the oil would probably remain for weeks to months, unless physically removed. Media interest throughout the incident was very high. The Governor of New Jersey and the Commissioner of DEP held numerous press confer-ences with the COTP. The incident was covered by the television, radio, and newspapers. [SEP] Captain of the Port Philadelphia Area Contingency Plan [SEP] exposed fine-sand beaches, fine-sand beaches, marshes, salt marsh, saltwater marshes, sand/ gravel beaches, sheltered marshes [SEP] Once the oil was reported, the DBRC dispatched response vessels to boom the tanker and skim floating oil. The tanker performed inspections, diver surveys, and tests to determine the source of the leak. The sea valve was identified as the cause. Once this was remedied, the ship completed lightering, took on bunkers, and was allowed to depart the anchorage. The NRC Patriot followed Anitra to collect any oil released that may have clung to her. Unsuccessful attempts were made to boom several inlets on the New Jersey coast. Marshes and marinas inside the inlets had small amounts of oil migrate through them. Open-water recovery was performed by large skimming vessels inside Delaware Bay and by Lori skimmers in shallow water just off the New Jersey beaches. Shoreline cleanup was mostly manual with rakes and shovels. In some areas shop-vacs were used to vacuum oil from the sand beaches. Tilling was employed on several sections of upper beaches. Removed oily sand was disposed of in an asphalt plant. [SEP] On May 9, 1996, the 846-foot T/V Anitra, carrying 41.9 million gallons of crude oil, reported approximately 200 gallons of oil bubbling from below her waterline. The vessel was anchored at Big Stone Anchorage in Delaware Bay. The on-scene weather was light winds, air temperature 49??F, with overcast skies and calm seas. The DBRC's two skimmers, Del River and Del Bay, and the National Response Corporation (NRC) skimmer Patriot response vessels, dispatched to the scene, boomed off the vessel and began skimming operations. Initially, it was believed that the oil was leaking from the sea chest, indicating the possibility that cargo was leaking into the ballast water piping. Observers on an overflight the next morning reported a steady stream of product extending from the vessel's stern to sea in a south-southeast direction for 3.5 miles, followed by a 3.8-mile sheen. After the first day, the estimate of oil spilled was raised to approxi-mately 10,000 gallons; after 10 days the estimate was 42,000 gallons. Diver surveys were conducted to identify the source of the leak. Approximately 600 barrels of an oil/water mixture were recovered by skimmers. Shoreline impact inside Delaware Bay occurred on the New Jersey side (approximately two miles of Higby and Sunset beaches in Cape May) by the third day after release. The ocean beaches of New Jersey were impacted several days later, from Cape May to Atlantic City. The USCG COTP Philadelphia and New Jersey DEP formed a Unified Command with the RP. Media coverage was high (the Governor was present at press conferences) due to proximity to the Memorial Day weekend. Avoiding beach closures was a major goal of the response. The other concern for the response was protecting the endangered piping plover and threatened least tern that nest on the beaches. Major efforts were made to remove the oiled sand and sediment as rapidly as possible. At one point over 400 workers were employed. Cleanup consisted of manual raking and, in several instances, tilling. Workers used shop-vacs at a number of locations to vacuum up the tarballs from the sand. [SEP] Birds: diving coastal birds, waterfowl, shorebirds, wading birds, gulls, terns, raptors, rookeries, foraging areas, migration stopover areas, nesting beaches, migratory routes, critical forage areas Fish: anadromous fish, nursery areas, estuarine fish, demersal fish Mollusks: oysters, clams, seed beds, abundant beds, harvest areas, high-concentration sites Crustaceans: horseshoe crab high-concentration sites Recreation: beaches, marinas, boat ramps, high-use recreational boating and fishing areas, state parks Management Areas: wildlife preserves, reserves Resource Extraction: commercial fisheries, bivalve aquaculture sites [SEP] NOAA was notified of this incident on May 13, 1996, by COTP Philadelphia. The COTP sent samples of oil from the vessel and tarballs for analysis to determine weathering and toxicity. The two reference oils received on May 21, 1996, were very similar in composition. The Kabinda and the Nemba were both high-alkane (waxy) crude oils with a low abundance of aromatic hydrocarbons (AH). The high wax content made the oils readily susceptible to biodegradation. The tarball sample exhibited a significant reduction in the toxic AH components due to a combination of evaporation (weathering) and water-in-oil emulsification. NOAA delivered weather forecasts and provided the USCG with some warning of current reversals and possible areas of impacts. Trajectory analysis performed four days after the initial release indicated that oil had moved out of Delaware Bay and could possibly impact Cape May, New Jersey and Cape Henlopen, Delaware. The SSC provided a Tarball Information Sheet for use by the general public and media and participated in incident debriefs where the pros and cons of response options were discussed. The SSC supported this incident sporadically as needed by the USCG by telephone and fax. The response lasted 50 days. [SEP] tilling oil into sand [SEP] Both Nemba and Kabinda crude oils are light products having a 38.5 and 32.9 API, respectively. The oil initially spread into thin films as observed during the May 10 overflights. Over time, a combination of wind and waves weathered and tore the films into smaller patches (tarballs from pea- to marble-sized) that scattered over a much wider area. An increase in sea state tended to overwash the tarballs and break up any associated sheens. A lack of visible sheen associated with the tarball field is not an indication that the oil sank. Using both visual and remote sensing techniques, the resulting tarball field was difficult to track because the tarballs were widely dispersed. NOAA developed a trajectory analysis that indicated a necessarily large uncertainty due to the delay and limited nature of the information provided. This analysis indicated that the Seven Mile Beach area was threatened. The trajectory analysis uncertainty indicated for May 14, 1996, increased due to the changes in the weather since the last trajectory. Therefore, the tarballs were likely to be dispersed over a much wider area. Although climatological currents indicated a southerly flow outside Delaware Bay, shelf-waves transiting the area are not uncommon and would lead to local, non-climatological currents.
At 1430 Eastern Standard Time (EST) on January 19, 1996, MSO Providence received a call from Station Castle Hill that the tug Scandia was on fire. The tug Scandia was located some three miles south and west of Point Judith, Rhode Island towing the barge North Cape, which was carrying 94,000 barrels of #2 home heating fuel Weather was severe with sustained winds of more than 40 knots from the south-southeast and forecast to increase. The tug Scandia was abandoned and USCG Search and Rescue teams were dispatched to assist the crew. At approximately 2000 EST, a USCG helicopter reported that the barge North Cape was aground on Nebraska Shoals, directly adjacent to the Trustom Pond National Wildlife Refuge, owned and operated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). The helicopter further reported that the barge was releasing oil. The barge North Cape spilled oil in two separate releases. The first, released during the height of the initial storm, was 700,000 gallons and the second, less than a day later, was 125,000 gallons. The combination of the type of oil released and the energy of the storm caused great dispersion into the water column. As a result, in the days following the spill, great numbers of shellfish (mostly bivalves and juvenile lobsters) washed ashore. Subsequently, the Rhode Island Department of Health closed more than 200 square miles of commercial fishery in the area of the spill. This closure was coordinated with the EPA Region One and with NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), which closed federal fishing grounds using the Magnuson Act. This is the first time federal fisheries have been closed due to oil contamination. The emergency phase of the response lasted seven days and the on-scene command post was demobilized following the removal of the barge North Cape from the beach. Active USCG spill response and assessment continued from the MSO, including re-survey of key impacted recreational and endangered piping plover nesting beaches. The full re-opening of the Rhode Island fishery was not complete until the middle of June. Organoleptic panels were established to certify that seafood, lobsters, and clams, in particular, were marketable. USCG district 1. Keyword: endangered species, ARTES. [SEP] Tug SCANDIA SPILL - WEATHER FORECAST FROM NOAA/HAZMAT - 1500 EST SATURDAY January 20, 1996 - - SUNRISE: - 07:08 EST (January 21) - SUNSET: - 16:47 EST (January 21) - - 36-HOUR WEATHER FORECAST - Precipitation: - A region of high pressure will dominate the area during the next 24- hours. However, there is a chance of flurries on Sunday night. - - Winds: - Tonight, winds are forecasted from the north at 10 knots. Sunday morning, winds are expected from the northeast at 15 knots becoming easterly in the afternoon. Winds are expected to remain easterly into the evening. Sunday night and into Monday evening, winds are forecasted from the east at 20 knots. - - Wave heights: - Tonight, waves are forecasted 6 feet subsiding tonight to 4 feet through Monday. - - Temperature: - Tonight, overnight lows are expected in the mid 20's. Sunday, high temperatures are forecasted in the mid 30's with overnight lows in the high 20's. Monday, high near 40 with lows in the high 20's. - - EXTENDED WEATHER FORECAST: - Tuesday, high near 40 with lows in the high 20's. Wednesday, high in the low 40's and lows in the high 20's. There is a chance of precipitation on Wednesday. [SEP] Double-click on picture to view or print. [SEP] Attached please find the health and safety doc. for fuel oil #2. - - Steve, below is a text copy of the attachment, if you have a problem with downloading it. It should be in the hot line. - - Fuel Oil # 2 Spill - Health and Safety Considerations - - Below are health and safety considerations for fuel oil #2 spill: - - Toxicity - Fuel oil #2 is a mixture of volatile hydrocarbons. While exposure to low concentrations (several parts per million) of fuel oil #2 vapors is not a hazard to most people, inhalation of high concentration of fuel oil #2 vapors may cause dizziness, nausea, vomiting and eye irritation. Prolonged skin exposure may cause dermatitis, especially to sensitive individuals. Aspiration (intake of fuel oil #2 liquid into the lungs) is difficult to treat and may cause severe pneumonitis and pulmonary edema. - - Recommendations- Response Personnel - ???€? - Conduct air sampling and provide respiratory equipment if needed - ???€? - Provide protective clothing, gloves, and eye protection to all response personnel coming in contact with fuel oil #2 - ???€? - Educate workers on the risks they face and appropriate use of personal protective equipment (PPE) - ???€? - Monitor the working environment to make sure that safe work practices are being carried out. Hazards such as hypothermia, work near/on water, and other safety related problems may be more of a threat than chemical exposure. - - General Public - ???€? - Monitor possible exposure to the general public - ???€? - Provide a timely public advisory, and if needed advise of necessary steps to take (e.g., shelter in place) - ???€? - Provide a contact point for concerned citizens to call - - Flammability - Fuel oil #2 is a combustible liquid, with a flash point between 110 and 190 F (USCG). If ignited, a fuel oil #2 layer thicker than 3 mm on the water may burn. In addition, spilled fuel accumulated on the beach may burn as well, if ignited. Fire potential is especially serious in confined spaces. - - Recommendations: - ???€? - Measures should be taken to prevent accidental ignition of the spilled fuel - ???€? - Entry into confined spaces should always follow OSHA and USCG safety requirements, which include air sampling, ventilation, protective equipment, and standby rescue. - - Odor Vs. Threat - The odor threshold of fuel oil #2 is around 1 part per million (ppm). While an average person would detect fuel oil #2 vapors at this concentration, some people could actually smell it at much lower levels. At air concentration of 1 ppm fuel oil #2 vapors are rarely a hazard to the average person. However, sensitive individuals may be affected by the vapors even at this low levels, while others may perceive the odor as offensive and assume that they are overexposed. - - Recommendations: Provide timely information to both the general public and to health and emergency authorities. This step is crucial. Past experience has shown that the sooner the public and local authorities are informed of what has spilled, how much, what to expect, and what are the possible hazards, the lower the level of anxiety is and the easier it is to provide additional information later. - - Sampling for fuel oil #2 - Since fuel oil #2 is a mixture of hydrocarbons, precise sampling for it is difficult. Nevertheless, photoionization detectors, flame ionization detectors, calorimetric tubes, and other instruments may provide an approximate concentration of fuel oil #2 vapors in air. Use sampling instrumentation with the limitations and shortcomings of these instruments in mind. [SEP] Coarse to medium sand beaches, mixed sand and gravel, sheltered tidal marshes [SEP] naturally dispersed oil, federal fishery closure, fish tainting, organoleptic testing [SEP] Tug SCANDIA SPILL - WEATHER FORECAST FROM NOAA/HAZMAT - 1500 EST WEDNESDAY January 24, 1996 - - SUNRISE: - 07:06 EST (January 24) - SUNSET: - 16:50 EST (January 24) - - 36-HOUR WEATHER FORECAST: - Winds: - Tonight, the winds are forecast to be from the south at 25 to 35 knots shifting before midnight from the west at 20 to 30 knots. Thursday, winds are expected from the northwest 20 to 30 knots diminishing to 15 to 20 knots after sunset. Tomorrow night, winds are forecast from the west at 10 to 15 knots. By daybreak on Friday, winds are forecast to be southeast at 10 to 15 knots. - - Wave heights: - Tonight, seas 8 to 15 feet are expected. Thursday, seas are forecast to be 5 to 10 diminishing 4 to 8 feet by Friday morning. - - Temperature: - Tonight, the temperatures will range upper 20's to lower 30's. Thursday, the temperatures are predicted to be cold with highs in the low 30's and lows in the 20's. Friday, high temperatures are expected in the mid 30's. - - Precipitation: - Tonight, visibility less than 3 miles with showers. Ceilings are expected below 1,000 feet. After the cold front has moved through the area, late tonight, visibility is expected to improve with ceiling lifting to 2,000 feet and greater. - - - EXTENDED WEATHER FORECAST: - Friday afternoon, winds are forecast from the southeast 15 to 20 knots with seas 4 to 8 feet. By Friday night, another powerful storm is expected to move through the spill area. There is a potential for gale force winds from the south0, low visibility and wind driven rain. Saturday, winds are forecast to be
Hurricane Emily caused a number of small oil spills and one hazardous material spill near Cape Hatteras, NC on September 1, 1993. After the hurricane moved north past the North Carolina outer banks, MSO Hampton Roads launched an observation flight to assess the damage done to the island's infrastructure, homes, and environment. The overflight found three areas in need of immediate attention. Oden Dock Marina (loss of a 500-gallon waste oil tank), Pelican's Roost Texaco Station (loss of a 2,000- to 3,000-gallon #2 diesel tank) and a location near the Pilot House Restaurant (loss of a home heating oil tank estimated less than 100 gallons). After the initial on-site inspections, MSO Hampton Roads maintained a staff at the island's Emergency Operations Center (EOC) with other federal, state and local emergency response personnel for two weeks. The USCG surveyed the entire coast of Hatteras Island by helicopter and land-based Pollution Response teams (PRTs). There was very little oil spilled; eight spills were reported and only three of these required cleanup. By September 3 cleanup at Oden's Marina and the restaurant had been completed and the removal of oil from the damaged Texaco tanks was underway. About 2,500 gallons of oil were collected and removed. The emergency response activities from Hurricane Emily on Hatteras Island consumed the attention and resources of most of the emergency response staff and the island's residents. The actual oil cleanup was handled by the USCG and their contractor International Marine Services. USCG district 5. Keyword: containment boom, sorbent boom, vacuum trucks. [SEP] tidal marsh, sandy beach [SEP] The light oil from the various tanks on the island moved downstream into the marsh structures adjacent to each facility. The waste oil lost from the tank at Oden's Marina oiled marsh grasses next to the marina for a length of 100 yards with a black band of oil approximately 12 inches wide. A 150- by 500-yard pocket of oil was found behind Pelican's Roost Texaco, and a fairly heavy concentration of oil was found in a small inlet one-quarter mile east of the Pilot House Restaurant in Buxton, NC. [SEP] Hurricane Emily caused a number of small oil spills and one hazardous material spill near Cape Hatteras, NC on September 1, 1993. After the hurricane moved north past the North Carolina outer banks, MSO Hampton Roads launched an observation flight to assess the damage done to the island's infrastructure, homes, and environment. The overflight found three areas in need of immediate attention. Oden Dock Marina (loss of a 500-gallon waste oil tank), Pelican's Roost Texaco Station (loss of a 2,000- to 3,000-gallon #2 diesel tank) and a location near the Pilot House Restaurant (loss of a home heating oil tank estimated less than 100 gallons). After the initial on-site inspections, MSO Hampton Roads maintained a staff at the island's Emergency Operations Center (EOC) with other federal, state and local emergency response personnel for two weeks. The USCG surveyed the entire coast of Hatteras Island by helicopter and land-based Pollution Response teams (PRTs). There was very little oil spilled; eight spills were reported and only three of these required cleanup. By September 3 cleanup at Oden's Marina and the restaurant had been completed and the removal of oil from the damaged Texaco tanks was underway. About 2,500 gallons of oil were collected and removed. The emergency response activities from Hurricane Emily on Hatteras Island consumed the attention and resources of most of the emergency response staff and the island's residents. The actual oil cleanup was handled by the USCG and their contractor International Marine Services. [SEP] Two pint-sized bottles of amino benzene labeled "poison" were assumed lost from the Fischer Scientific Co. The bottles had been packed in vermiculite in a wooden box large enough to hold four pint bottles; only two were in the box. Even if this chemical was lost, there could not have been enough spilled to cause a health threat. One container with two liter bottles of aniline was found in the Frisco Substation of the electric company. These were removed from the site by the electric company at the request of the MSO. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - USCG MSO Hampton Roads is participating with the Hattertas Island EOC in response to oil pollution as a result of damage caused by Hurricane Emily. The Coast Guard has surveyed the entire coast of Hatteras Island by both USCG helicopter and land based Pollution Response Teams. In general, there is very little oil spilled. However, oil spills were reported at eight different sites on Hatteras Island. Only three of these, Pelican's Roost Texaco, Oden's Marina, and a canal 1/4 mile east of Pilot House Restaurant have required cleanup. A Coast Guard contractor, Industrial Marine Service, has conducted cleanup operations at all three of these sites since Thursday, 2 September. By Friday, 3 September, cleanup at Oden's Marina and at the canal site had been completed. Efforts to remove diesel oil from damaged Texaco tanks continue. Over 2,500 gallons of diesel oil have been collected and removed. Limited numbers of dead fish have been observed washing up on shore at two locations. These fish kill locations are not located near any known oil pollution sites. No other injured or oiled wildlife have been observed near any oil pollution sites. New EOC CG voice telephone numbers are: 800-525-9394 800-525-9397 [SEP] NOAA Hotline 137, 2 reports. Virginia Institute of Marine Science. 1980. Sensitivity of Coastal Environments and Wildlife to Spilled Oil, State of North Carolina, Hazardous Materials Response Project, NOAA. 114 maps. [SEP] intertidal marshes [SEP] aniline, amino benzene [SEP] NOAA was notified of this response on September 2, 1993, by MSO Hampton Roads as part of the normal notification process in the USCG Hurricane Response Plan. The SSC accompanied the MSO on overflights on September 3 and on-scene field assessments during the weekend of September 4 and 5. NOAA helped the MSO staff establish their command post in the island's EOC and establish status boards to track the incident investigations. The SSC provided reports to the MSO's office in Hampton Roads and to the EOC's main offices in Richmond, VA. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - Important note concerning the NOAA "HOTLINE" Communications System: . . Please note that this system is used for NOAA internal communications and the reports are put in chronologically. There is NO corrective "post editing" of the reports. As a result of this, early reports may have information that later proved to be incorrect. Sometimes these errors are corrected in a later report, but sometimes corrections are made over the phone or in-person, and no correcting message is entered. This reflects the use of this system as a real-time spill communications system and is not intended to be an event-log. Please keep this in mind when reading HOTLINE reports for this incident. . If you have any problems with this system please contact the SSC on watch at 206-526-6317. . Hurricane Emily Hatteras, NC Hurricane Emily caused a number of small oil spills and one hazardous material spill near Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. The following chronology was received from CPO Brent Fonner, USCG. 1 September, 1993 1330 the Pollution Response Team (PRT) departed Marine Safety Office (MSO)Hampton Roads, VA. 1700 PRT arrived in Buxton, NC. 1745 Arrived Pelican's Roost Texaco in Hatteras, NC. A 20,000 gallon kerosene tank was found on its side. There was a strong smell of diesel in the entire area. Light sheening in a wetland area behind the gas station was apparent from the Texaco station. No cleanup was done at this time. 1830 PRT departed from the Pelican's Roost Texaco. 1850 PRT arrived at Teache's Lair Marina, Hatteras, NC where a 5,000 gallon gasoline spill had been reported. An empty 5,000 gallon tank was found on its side, but no sheening, visible pollution, or odor was apparent. 2 September, 1993 0800 the Pollution Response Team (PRT) continued to survey the Hatteras area, but no pollution in quantities that could be cleaned up were found. 1330 A 100 yard by 100 yard light residual sheening was discovered at Oden Marina, Hatteras, NC. 1340 A 150 yard by 500 yard pocket of oil was discovered directly behind Pelican's Roost Texaco in Hatteras, NC. 1350 Discovered a 5 foot by 50 foot area of very light sheen at the Island Boat Works in Frisco, NC. 1400 A light sheen was discovered at the Buxton Harbor Marina, Buxton, NC. 1410 A 10 foot by 20 foot oil sheen of unknown origin was discovered on the Buxton Cemetery Road, Buxton, NC. 1420 A fairly heavy concentratin of oil was found in a small inlet 1/4 mile east of the Pilot House Restaurant in Buxton. Origin of the oil is unknown. 1450 The overflight was concluded. Divided Pollution Response Team into two groups. PRT1 en route to the Pilot House Restaurant. PRT2 en route to the
On August 10, 1993, at approximately 0545, the freighter Balsa 37, the barge Ocean 255, and the barge Bouchard 155 collided in the shipping channel west of the Skyway Sunshine Bridge south of Mullet Key in Tampa Bay, FL. MSO Tampa closed the port to vessel traffic. This collision caused three separate emergencies: 1) the Balsa 37, which was carrying a cargo of phosphate rock, was severely damaged on the starboard side, was listing at an increasing rate, and was in danger of capsizing in the channel; 2) the Ocean 255, which was loaded with jet fuel, gasoline, and a small amount of diesel fuel was burning out of control just south of Mullet Key; and 3) the Bouchard 155 was holed at the port bow spilling approximately 8,000 barrels of #6 fuel oil into Tampa Bay. Stabilizing the vessels was the first priority of responders. By 2200 the Ocean 255 barge fire was extinguished and the GST was conducting cooling procedures and maintaining a fire watch. Lightering operations were well underway on the Bouchard 155 barge in preparation for moving it to dockage in the Port of Tampa where it would be cleaned before dry docking. The Balsa 37 was intentionally grounded outside the shipping channel to prevent it from capsizing and to open the channel for traffic while repairs and stability evaluations were conducted. August 10 overflight observations showed a three- to six-meter wide band of oil along the beaches. By the next day, this band appeared to be about half its original width. Systematic shoreline surveys were conducted and oil was found buried by two to eight inches of clean sand deposited during high tide. Cleanup crews focused on manually removing the band of surface oil high on the beach. A plan was developed to remove the subsurface oil without generating large volumes of sediment for handling, disposal, and replacement. The plan called for mechanical removal of the heavy buried layers, manual removal of moderately oiled sediments, and mechanically pushing stained sand onto the lower part of the beach for surf washing. Pompoms were strung along the surf zone to collect any oil refloated during the surf washing. By August 11 the status of the vessels had improved substantially. The response focus began to change from emergency issues to skimming operations, protection strategies, forecasts, and planning. Meanwhile, cleanup crews were contending with very thick oil that had been deposited around some mangrove islands. Tarmats formed when sediment was mixed with oil along the shallow flats surrounding the islands. Large thick mats coated mangrove roots, oyster and seagrass beds, and tidal mud flats. Most of this oil was vacuumed out using vacuum transfer units on grounded barges staged around the islands and shallow areas. Seawalls within the bay were being washed using high-pressure water heated to 110 degrees. The GST was onscene throughout the spill response. They provided support with the Vessel of Opportunity Skimming System as well as the fire fighting, monitoring, and lightering of the Ocean 255 barge. Roughly 14.5 miles of fine-grained sand beach from St. Petersburg Beach north to Redington Shores Beach were affected by this spill. Sand beaches on Egmont Key at the entrance to Tampa Bay were also oiled. Additionally, four mangrove islands inside the entrance to Boca Ciega Bay at Johns Pass and two small areas of Spartina marsh were oiled. Jetties, seawalls, and riprap within the bay and at Johns Pass and Blind Pass were also oiled to varying degrees. It is estimated that over 30 miles of residential seawalls were oiled within Boca Ciega Bay. Some impact also occurred on the northern side of Mullet Key at Bonne Fortune Key in fringing mangroves. Seawalls, jetties, walkways, and riprap were cleaned by high-pressure hot-water washes. PES-51 was considered for some of these cleaning needs, but after observing comparison tests performed by the manufacturer, the RP decided against its use. Cleanup of submerged tarmats offshore is ongoing. NOAA is working with the RRT, the GST, the Army Corps of Engineers, the FOSC, State officials, and various scientists and engineers to develop a sound method for dealing with the tarmats. Additional on-scene participation by NOAA is anticipated. USCG district 7. Keyword: sorbent pompoms, high-pressure warm-water washes, sorbent boom. [SEP] NOAA was notified of this incident on August 10, 1993, by MSO Tampa Bay. The MSO needed immediate support so a former SSC, now with NOAA Aircraft Operation in Tampa, went onscene to help until the Florida SSC arrived at 1230. The NOAA on-scene team consisted of representatives from NOAA HAZMAT Modeling and Simulation Studies Branch (MASS), and Biological Assessment Team (BAT), the SSC from Louisiana, and NOAA contractors. They were onscene through September 7. The NOAA team provided daily weather, tides, currents, trajectory updates, and cleanup tracking and monitoring reports. The team also participated in all RRT teleconference calls, served on the Shoreline Cleanup Technical Committee and the How Clean Is Clean Committee. They provided evaluation and observation reports on cleanup techniques and progress to the FOSC, worked closely with all the responding entities to develop sound approaches to cleanup and environmental issues, and provided support and information regarding several important health and safety issues.*&*&NOAA coordinated efforts focused at trajectories, weather, tides and current information, and environmental response and study issues among several academic, state and federal institutions. NOAA's Aircraft Operations Center, based at MacDill Air Force Base, provided helicopter support for overflights. They also provided temporary hanger storage for GST response equipment. The USCG DRAT environmental specialist worked with the NOAA team on environmental issues. The director and one faculty member from the University of Miami's newly formed South Florida Oil Spill Research Center spent several days with the NOAA team to increase their knowledge of spill responses. NOAA gave the FOSC a report addressing concerns, considerations, benefits, and liabilities of several possible techniques that could deal with removing the tarmats and submerged oil. The SSC expects to return onscene to help evaluate new cleanup operations when they begin. [SEP] oil burial on sand beaches, cleanup of buried oil, oil patches submerging and stabilizing around mangrove islands, stranded oil on oyster and seagrass beds and tidal flats, and chemical countermeasures [SEP] During the cleanup operations, a test demonstration of PES-51 for cleaning jetties, riprap, concrete walkways, and metal hand railings at the entrance to Johns Pass was conducted. PES-51 washes were performed twice. The effectiveness was compared to results from the high-pressure hot-water washes being used to clean the seawalls within the bay. The water washes generally did a better job on the rocks and rough surfaces; whereas, the PES-51 seemed to have a slight advantage on the smoother surfaces. After observing the tests, the RRT granted approval for the use of PES-51 on jetties, concrete and wooden walkways, and hand railings as needed. NOAA recommended using the water washes and then, if needed, use PES-51 to further clean the more heavily oiled and persistent areas. The RP chose not to use PES-51 for any of the cleaning. The Ocean 255 fire was a health and safety risk. The smoke plume presented a hazard as did the potential for explosions and burns. After the fire was out and during subsequent lightering operations, the possibility of flashbacks or explosions still existed. Heat stress became a problem for many of the responders and cleanup crews. The potential health risks to swimmers and users of oil-contaminated public beaches became an issue. The oil spilled has a high aromatic fraction and high levels of sulfur. Also addressed, was the use of public beaches while heavy equipment was in operation. Local weather was watched closely throughout the spill response. Tropical storms or localized thunderstorms could be a detriment to the response. One responder was struck by lightning. Representatives from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) were brought onscene to address these issues and to monitor proper worker safety. NOAA, the USCG, and OSHA worked together closely while addressing these issues.*&*&The cooperation among all the parties involved in this response was exceptional. Local officials were supportive throughout the response and provided meaningful input to the process. The State of Florida assumed the role of lead trustee and did an excellent job of coordinating efforts for the response, while at the same time performing damage assessment duties. It was officially noted that the success of wildlife and bird rescue and treatment operations were unprecedented. Most of the birds affected by the spill were Brown Pelicans. [SEP] On August 10, 1993, three ships collided in Tampa Bay, Florida: the BOUCHARD B155 barge, the freighter BALSA 37, and the barge OCEAN 255. The BOUCHARD B155 spilled an estimated 336,000 gallons of No. 6 fuel oil into Tampa Bay. [SEP] Countermeasures used during this spill were mechanical or manual. Skimming operations were used to collect free-floating oil. Efficiency and effectiveness of skimming operations were extremely high. The oil-to-water ratio of retrieved product was estimated to be as high as 90 percent in many cases. A major limitation to skimming operations
On June 8, 1990 at approximately 2330, while the Italian tank vessel Fraqmura was lightering the Norwegian tank vessel Mega Borg, an explosion occurred in the pump room of the Mega Borg. The two ships were in the Gulf of Mexico, 57 miles southeast of Galveston Texas in international waters, but within the U.S. exclusive economic zone. As a result of the explosion, a fire started in the pump room and spread to the engine room. An estimated 100,000 barrels of Angolan Palanca crude was burned or released into the water from the Mega Borg during the next seven days. Approximately 238 barrels of oil was discharged when the Fraqmura intentionally broke away from the Mega Borg. Explosions on the Mega Borg, caused the stern of the ship began to settle lower in the water and list to the port side. A continuous discharge of burning oil flowed over the aft port quarter of the ship. Less than an hour after the explosions on the Mega Borg, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) in Galveston dispatched two USCG cutters to the scene. Weather was calm throughout the incident. Winds were generally around 10 to 15 knots and air temperature were between 80 and 90 degrees Fahrenheit. USCG district 8. Keyword: Corexit 9527, skimmer, Air-Eye aircraft, side looking airborne radar (SLAR), Atlantic Strike Team (AST), U.S. Navy Supervisor of Salvage (NAVSUPSALV), AE BioSea Process, explosion, fire, contingency plan.. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - WEATHER FOR M/V MEGA BORG SPILL Wednesday, 20 June AM NWS FORECAST Winds: Time Dir (from) Speed(kts) Seas(ft) 6/20 am 210-215 8-10 <3 6/20 pm 160-200 12 2-3 6/20 tonite 190-230 8-10 <3 6/21 am 170-210 14 1-3 6/21 pm 170-200 10 <3 Weather: A weak surface high pressure is seen over the Gulf of Mexico. Weak surface boundaries over the Gulf will continue. Chance of isolated showers or thundershowers. EXTENDED OUTLOOK The upper high will slowly shift westward as the upper trough over US moves eastward across the Central US Friday & Saturday. Continued chance of isolated showers & thundershowers tomorrow. OBSERVATIONS Latest observations from the Sabine C-Man showed winds from 300 degrees at 4 kts. This again seems to be influenced by an early morning onshore breeze. Buoy observations near the vessel show winds from 170 degrees with gusts up to 14 kts. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - WEATHER FOR M/V MEGA BORG SPILL Saturday, 23 June PM NWS FORECAST Winds: Time Dir (from) Speed(kts) Seas(ft) 6/23 Tonight 180-240 10 1 3 6/24 Morning 180-240 10 1 3 6/24 Afternoon 180-240 10 1 3 6/24 Evening 180-240 10 15 2 3 Weather: There is a possibility of isolated showers and thundershowers this evening and into tomorrow. OBSERVATIONS Current buoy observations near the vessel have reported winds from 030 degrees at about 2 knots. Observations from the Sabine C-Man station have reported winds from 210 at about 12 knots with gusts to 14 knots. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. WEATHER FOR M/V MEGA BORG SPILL Monday, 11 June PM NWS FORECAST Winds: Time Dir (from) Speed(kts) 9/11 All Day E and SE 5-10 9/12 Day E and SE 5-10 9/12 Late Evening E and SE 10-15 Weather: Very little chance of thunderstorm activity passing near the spill. Thunderstorm activity was located 100 miles south of Corpus Christi. Seas will remain 2-5 ft with visibility unrestricted. EXTENDED OUTLOOK Winds are expected to remain from the east-southeast, possibility of stronger winds tomorrow night. Thunderstorm activity diminishing by Wednesday. OBSERVATIONS Observations near the spill site have reported calm winds (2 kts) from the East-Southeast from this afternoon through tomorrow afternoon. Seas were 1-2 ft. Temperatures were in the mid 80's. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - Important note concerning the NOAA "HOTLINE" Communications System: . . Please note that this system is used for NOAA internal communications and the reports are put in chronologically. There is NO corrective "post editing" of the reports. As a result of this, early reports may have information that later proved to be incorrect. Sometimes these errors are corrected in a later report, but sometimes corrections are made over the phone or in-person, and no correcting message is entered. This reflects the use of this system as a real-time spill communications system and is not intended to be an event-log. Please keep this in mind when reading HOTLINE reports for this incident. . If you have any problems with this system please contact the SSC on watch at 206-526-6317. POTENTIAL MAJOR INCIDENT: . The M/V MEGABORG with 800,000 BBL of "Polanea-Angola" crude oil aboard had an accident, just after mid-night, while transferring cargo during the night of June 8th-9th. The ship is anchored in 120 feet of water, approximately 60 miles off Galveston and is now on fire. (Latitude 28-33N 94-08W) Two crew member are dead and two missing with 36 evacuated. The other ship involved in the transfer operation was able to safely escape. The SSC, Chris Nelson is in route to Galveston. MSO Galveston is the CG command post (409-766-3628). NOAA/MASS is providing trajectory support. An overflight this morning reported that the fire appears to be in the area of the engine and pump rooms, but has probably spread into the house. There is an oil slick approximately 6 mi. long consisting of mostly rainbow with some brown oil trending N and NW from the ship. Winds are SE 10 to 15. .End of Message. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - WEATHER FOR M/V MEGA BORG SPILL Thursday, 21 June PM NWS FORECAST Winds: Time Dir (from) Speed(kts) Seas(ft) fri 6/22 evening 160-200 10-15 2 4 sat 6/23 morning 160-200 10-15 2 4 sat 6/23 evening 150-180 10-15 2 3 Weather: Widely scattered showers and thunderstorms, mostly over land or near the coast. EXTENDED OUTLOOK Winds: Time Dir (from) Speed(kts) Seas(ft) sun 6/24 S to SE 10-15 2 3 mon 6/25 S to SE 10-15 2 3 tues 6/26 S 10-15 2 3 wed 6/27 S 10-15 2 3 Weather: Widely scattered showers and thunderstorms through Wednesday. OBSERVATIONS Afternoon buoy observations from the off shore station showed winds generally from the South at speeds near 5 knots. The latest observation had winds from 180 degrees at 4 knots with gusts to 8 knots. [SEP] Tanker MEGA BORG incident, offshore of Galveston, Texas, June 1990. A U.S. Navy skimmer removes floating oil from the surface water. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. [SEP] Tanker MEGA BORG incident, offshore of Galveston, Texas, June 1990. Oiled sea turtles at the wildlife rescue center. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - Situation: Lightering of the vessel commenced at 9:30 pm last night and continues today. Complete lightering of the M/V MEGA BORG is estimated to take 5 days. MASS: (Galt / Petersen) Galt and Petersen went on an overflight early this afternoon. Dye drops were repeated at the 3 sites selected yesterday; similar results were observed. No significant oil was identified on the flight. A strong southeasterly out-flow was present through the Galveston jetties, with the sediment interface extending 20 miles. The morning SLAR covered areas around High Island: no oil was observed. The afternoon SLAR was programed to cover a band of longitude from 94-40W to 93-30N. This area has not previously been mapped. Wind conditions were such that observational conditions were good, and wave action was such that tarballs might be expected to break up and produce sheen. Widely scattered sheen was observed in a general band extending from SW to NE from about 28-40N, 94- 20W to 29-30N, 93-30W. An interpretation of the SLAR was presented in map form. SSC: (Christopherson) SSC and Galt briefed OSC at morning operations meeting. SSC met with Coast Guard and cleanup contractors to discuss strategy for dealing with future shore impacts. Cleanup contractor has a crew in Port Arthur for the next 14-21 days, cleaning response equipment prior to its release. This crew will be available to respond to any shore impacts during this period. As reponse scales down, cleanup contractors in Galveston (Mahlin) and Port Arthur (ICI) remain on call to deal with oil if it comes ashore. Contractors claim they are able to respond to a call-out with 10-20 people within two hours. Sorbent boom is currently staged at Sea Rim State Park and at Sabine Pass. Sorbent booms deployed along the refuge will be left in place for another 1-2 weeks, then recovered by the contractor. The Coast Guard continues to monitor the spill with two overflights a day. Louisiana reps and cleanup contractors agreed on a protection strategy for shorelines east of Sabine Pass. Contractors will deploy booms in specific locations identified
On March 1 at 2115, a release of about 115 bbl (about 5000 gallons) of crude oil occured from a Texaco barge offloading at the Exxon Bayway Transfer Facility in Arthur Kill.  A manipulator arm connection uncoupled upon pressurization of the line.  Only part of the oil entered the water, the remainder being trapped in an oil recovery system.  As of the afternoon of March 2, 3500 gallons had been recovered.  Because of an earlier spill in the vicinity (E-25 BARGE, Hotline incident 28), boom and other equipment were already in the area and were rapidly put in service.  There is some sheen in the water, but all of the spilled oil was contained.  About 4 miles of boom are now deployed in the area, 8000 feet of which were deployed for this incident.  Exxon has assumed responsibility.  SSC Ed Levine was on-scene between 1030 and 1300 today.  USCG district 1. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - Important note concerning the NOAA "HOTLINE" Communications System: . . Please note that this system is used for NOAA internal communications and the reports are put in chronologically. There is NO corrective "post editing" of the reports. As a result of this, early reports may have information that later proves to be incorrect. Sometimes these errors are corrected in a later report, but sometimes corrections are made over the phone or in-person, and no correcting message is entered. This reflects the use of this system as a real-time spill communications system and is not intended to be an event-log. Please keep this in mind when reading HOTLINE reports for this incident. . If you have any problems with this system please contact the SSC on watch at 206-526-6317. . . On March 1 at 2115, a release of about 115 bbl (about 5000 gallons) of crude oil occured from a Texaco barge offloading at the Exxon Bayway Transfer Facility in Arthur Kill. A manipulator arm connection uncoupled upon pressurization of the line. Only part of the oil entered the water, the remainder being trapped in an oil recovery system. As of the afternoon of March 2, 3500 gallons had been recovered. Because of an earlier spill in the vicinity (E-25 BARGE, Hotline incident 28), boom and other equipment were already in the area and were rapidly put in service. There is some sheen in the water, but all of the spilled oil was contained. About 4 miles of boom are now deployed in the area, 8000 feet of which were deployed for this incident. Exxon has assumed responsibility. SSC Ed Levine was on-scene between 1030 and 1300 today.
At 0630 on August 30, 1989, oil was observed coming from the southwest and washing ashore at Grand Isle State Park on the Gulf of Mexico.  By 0900, the oil covered an area of beach measuring 3-1/2 miles long by 2-1/2 feet wide.  A "bluish" sheen and some floating oil were reported just offshore.  U.S. Coast Guard Station Houma personnel investigated and obtained samples for later typing and analysis.  Coast Guard personnel reported that the oil on the shore appeared to be a heavy crude.  Park officials planned to rake the oil from the one mile of State-owned shore in preparation for the upcoming Labor Day weekend.  Plans for the 2-1/2 miles of the village of Grand Isle-owned beaches to the southwest were unknown.  USCG district 8. [SEP] NOAA/OMA was notified of the incident at 1550 on August 30, 1989, by the Coast Guard Station, Houma. NOAA was requested to provide a hindcast trajectory to determine whether an investigation for potential sources would be feasible, and to assist in expediting the oil analysis. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) recommended that additional samples be taken at the State park site to assure an adequate fresh sample supply, and a representative analysis of the oil on the shore. NOAA provided a hindcast trajectory to Coast Guard that covered four days prior to the time of the reported beach impact at the State Park. The Coast Guard noted that unknown oil slicks had been sighted the previous day in the Grand Isle vicinity by local fishermen, a Conoco contracted service helicopter, and the Coast Guard vessel POINT SOL. The SSC arranged with Louisiana State University to receive, type, and analyze samples taken from the State-owned beach. Results from the typing and analysis indicated that the oil was a refined product similar to fuel oil. Because the stock oil used in the sample oil production could not be readily identified, the spill could not be specifically dated. However, a estimate of 2-3 days between the time of the spill and when the oil sample was given. [SEP] At 0630 on August 30, 1989, oil was observed coming from the southwest and washing ashore at Grand Isle State Park on the Gulf of Mexico. By 0900, the oil covered an area of beach measuring 3-1/2 miles long by 2-1/2 feet wide. A "bluish" sheen and some floating oil were reported just offshore. U.S. Coast Guard Station Houma personnel investigated and obtained samples for later typing and analysis. Coast Guard personnel reported that the oil on the shore appeared to be a heavy crude. Park officials planned to rake the oil from the one mile of State-owned shore in preparation for the upcoming Labor Day weekend. Plans for the 2-1/2 miles of the village of Grand Isle-owned beaches to the southwest were unknown. [SEP] Coast Guard Station Houma began an investigation into the possible offshore platform and/or transiting vessel sources for the spill. However, the Coast Guard Marine Safety Office, Morgan City, directed Station Houma to discontinue the investigation due to caseload. Beach cleanup at the Grand Isle State Park was completed by the evening of August 30. Village-owned beaches to the southwest of the park were cleared of oil by the next day's cycle of tides and wave activity.
On August 15, 1989, the U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Office (MSO), Providence, Rhode Island, received a report of oil sheen and sludge in the open ocean 100 miles east of Nantucket.  USCG district 1. [SEP] No oil was visible in the area on the following day. [SEP] NOAA/OMA was notified of the incident on August 15, 1989, by the Coast Guard MSO, Providence, and requested to estimate the probable path of the floating oil. NOAA advised that the slick was at the edge of the Gulf Stream; many current eddies spin off the Gulf Stream at this location, making exact trajectory prediction difficult without accessing specialized satellite imagery. However, the normal flow of current outside of the Gulf Stream eddies would be downwind with the south-southwest winds of 10 to 15 knots. No landfall for the floating oil was anticipated.
On March 24, 1989, the tanker Exxon Valdez, en route from Valdez, Alaska to Los Angeles, California, ran aground on Bligh Reef in Prince William Sound, Alaska. The vessel was traveling outside normal shipping lanes in an attempt to avoid ice. Within six hours of the grounding, the Exxon Valdez spilled approximately 10.9 million gallons of its 53 million gallon cargo of Prudhoe Bay Crude. Eight of the eleven tanks on board were damaged. The oil would eventually impact over 1,100 miles of non-continuous coastline in Alaska, making the Exxon Valdez the largest oil spill to date in U.S. waters. The response to the Exxon Valdez involved more personnel and equipment over a longer period of time than did any other spill in U.S. history. Logistical problems in providing fuel, meals, berthing, response equipment, waste management and other resources were one of the largest challenges to response management. At the height of the response, more than 11,000 personnel, 1,400 vessels and 85 aircraft were involved in the cleanup. Shoreline cleanup began in April of 1989 and continued until September of 1989 for the first year of the response. The response effort continued in 1990 and 1991 with cleanup in the summer months, and limited shoreline monitoring in the winter months. Fate and effects monitoring by state and Federal agencies are ongoing. USCG district 17. Keyword: Inipol, Customblen, skimmer, sorbent belt skimmer, rope mops, sorbents, boom, pompoms, Corexit 7664, Corexit 9580, Corexit 9527, BP 1100X, International Bird Rescue and Research Center (IBRRC), Regional Response Team, fingerprinting, lightering, manual removal, vacuum truck, disposal, high-pressure hot water washing, high-pressure washing, low pressure washing, water-washing, remote response, side looking airborne radar (SLAR), steam generators, volunteers.. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - EVENING REPORT 4/9/89 SITUATION REPORT: Winds outside the Sound are forecast to increase to east 35 kts. Sunday night, swinging to southeast 20 kts. midday Monday. A small craft advisory has been issued for inside the Sound, with northeast winds increasing to 30 kts. Sunday and diminishing to southeast 20 kts. on Monday. The strong winds should increase the mixing and dispersion of the oil in the Gulf, and push more of the oil remaining in the Sound out through Montague Strait. SLAR images and visual overflight observations show the "leading edge" of the identifiable oil to be approximately 22-24 nm south of the Pye Islands (approximately 200 nm from Valdez). This position has only varied slightly for the last four days and reflects the area in which the sheen and streamers of mousse have sufficiently diffused such that they are no longer visually identifiable as oil. A 2-3 year old juvenile Gray whale was towed ashore by the fishing vessel RESOLUTION into Sleepy Bay, at the north end of Latouche Island, on the evening of April 8th. Bud Antonelis of NMFS Marine Mammal Lab, inspected the carcass and determined that the whale had died before the time of the spill. He recommended that the carcass be towed back to sea and sunk, as it posses a threat to scavenging birds and other wild life because of the oil now on the surface of its skin. Gary Petrae is serving as the SSC for this spill at the Coast Guard MSO in Anchorage, and Tom Callahan will be working with him on monitoring the progress of the oil after it leaves Prince William Sound and moves into the jurisdiction of MSO Anchorage. The phone numbers for Gary and Tom at the Anchorage command post are 271-5137 or 271-3525. OVERFLIGHTS: Simecek-Beatty/Reilly NOAA Helicopter Objectives were to check Hinchinbrook Island for beach impact. Flew from Johnstone Pt. to Port Etches. No oil observed on the beach. Sheen was observed 2.4 miles east of Johnstone Pt. A thin band of mousse was observed 5 miles east of Hinchinbrook Island. Landed at Johnstone Pt., no oil on beach. Simecek-Beatty/Levine Coast Guard H-3 Objectives were to: 1) verify reports of oil on the northwest beach of Hinchinbrook Island observed large algae blooms and streaks of biotic material, no oil; 2) surveyed Hawkins Cut for oil - no oil observed. Callahan/Shaw Coast Guard H-3 Overflight through Valdez Narrows around the south side of Glacier Island, followed coastline to Esther Island. Followed the coastline of Esther Island from half way up the east side, around the south end and two-thirds of the way up the west side. No oil or sheen was sighted. Light sheen with mousse streamers was seen in the northern end of Knight Island Passage. Landed at the northern tip of Knight Island on a heavily oiled, rocky beach. Very light sheen at west end of Smith Island, heavier sheen seen near Outside Bay near the Exxon Valdez on Naked Island. FED/STATE/LOCAL/EXXON RESOURCE ASSESSMENT MEETING: Discussed NOAA Press Release concerning harassment of seals and sea lions by aircraft and boat traffic. Review overflights. Beach Surveys: Continued mapping distribution of oil and measuring profiles. Today went to Pt. Helen (Knight Island). Oil has penetrated 20 cm into the beach. Storms from NNE will loosen the oil and refloat it, could oil Latouche Island. Fisheries: No report Marine Mammals: Marine mammal survey has been completed. Dead Gray Whale found near Latouche Island, death was not related to the oil spill. Intertidal: No report Birds: A lot of birds and mammals are being brought in untagged. Plan to make an announcement on the NOAA Weather Station to request that people identify where wildlife is collected. Rehab Centers Reports: Total dead birds 835 Total dead otters 134 Live otters brought to the Center 103 Otters died at Center 47 Otters now alive at Center 50 Otters sent to Sea World 6 (2 still living) Live birds brought to Center 223 Birds died at Center 73 Birds alive at Center 138 Birds released 9 Birds euthanized 3 Reasons more birds haven't been released are that; 1) water softeners haven't arrived, soap scum still on birds, 2) Wintering birds will go back to Sound, risk re-oiling. Water Quality: Nineteen coolers of samples received from boats. Preliminary results show concentration of hydrocarbons are very low or non-detectable. Exxon cleanup activities: The Preliminary Strategy for Shoreline Cleanup for Phase I has been approved. Plan to begin cleanup activity on Tuesday. Phase I consists of Naked Island. A Flotel is to be positioned tomorrow. 300 staff are on-scene for the cleanup effort. 500 additional crew will arrive in a few days. Have additional 6,000 ft of shore boom to help corral loose oil around bays. Plan overflights tomorrow to identify exact location of oil. If the west side of Naked Island is not oiled will begin Phase II, which consists of pupping and anadromous stream areas. TOMORROW'S ACTIVITIES: Hielscher will fly on Exxon Twin Otter early morning flight, will concentrate on Esther Island, Wells Passage area. Payton/Simecek-Beatty will fly on NOAA Helicopter to survey N. Hinchenbrook Island and Knight Island. NMFS will go investigate a report of a dead sea lion or seal at the south end of Latouche Island. PERSONNEL ON SCENE: Robinson, Gleason Levine, Simecek- Beatty, Payton, Harris, Alabaster, Underwood, Hines, Murphy, Hielscher, Shaw, Reilly. DEPARTURES: Callahan (to Anchorage Command Post) ARRIVALS: Payton, Harris [SEP] VALDEZ: Snider continued surveillance overflight to Northwest Fishery District. Robinson and Simecek-Beatty made overflight on CG H-3 Helicopter to Northwest Fishery District to observe fishing vessels in the area and record any sheens observed. The Research and Development Committee met last night to consider all data gathered with respect to the Corexit 9580M2. After lengthy deliberations, the Committee reached a decision not to recommend that the FOSC seek RRT approval for interim broad-scale application of the chemical as part of the response. In general the rationale for this decision was that the test programs undertaken had not adequately demonstrated that removal and recovery efficiency was sufficient to outweigh the possible adverse effects of the substance. HOMER: (Wescott) Late meetings, no report available. KODIAK: (Talbott, Field) Situation: All flights cancelled today due to fog. The demboilization inspections have been rescheduled for Tuesday and Wednesday. Talbott spent the day working with Exxon and USCG to iron out differences in the information management process. Field continued to work with Dames and Moore on the subsistence sampling project. Plans for tomorrow: Continue demobilization inspections, weather permitting. Prepare for FOSC and AFOSC visit on Wednesday. SEWARD: (McGee) Situation: Mechanical cleanup continues. A MAC meeting was held, Exxon reported that USCG had approved four temporary mooring sites in Resurrection Bay to aid in the demobilization, equipment transfer and barge holding area. Exxon also said that they plan to complete hot water/high pressure flushing/washing at Morning Cove and Wildcat Cove and proceeded to Pony Cove on NPS land and another area in the Pye Islands. Exxon further announced that a bioremediation workshop was scheduled to explain the mechanical process. USCG announced that several work orders had been approved and long burning would commence in three days. USCG and ADEC overflew several areas in the Seward zone and
On January 28, 1989, the 4,325-foot Argentine Navy transport BAHIA PARAISO, ran aground on rocks two miles from the U.S. scientific base at Palmer Station, Antarctica, and immediately began leaking oil into this pristine ecological environment. The transport was carrying fuel to resupply an Argentine station in Antarctica when it grounded and gashed a 30-foot hole in its double hull. National Science Foundation scientists reported that the oil floating ashore had already begun to kill krill, small, shrimplike crustaceans which are a major part of the diet of the whales that visit Antarctica in the winter. The oil also affected gulls, giant petrels, penguins, and possibly other wildlife near the station. The 234 crew members and 81 tourists were removed from the grounded vessel and taken to Palmer Station. [SEP] By February 4, 1989, most of the islands within a 2 mile radius of the spill site had been contaminated with oil. Ultimately, the oil formed a slick with a 10 mile radius. The heaviest contamination occurred in Biscoe Bay and Arthur Harbor. Intertidal areas on Norse Point, Laggard Island, Limitrophe Island, Cormorant Island, and Jacobs Island were affected. Three weeks after the spill, Biscoe Bay had been cleaned through the processes of evaporation and wave action. By April, the leakage from the Bahia Paraiso was greatly reduced, and only those areas close to the wreck (Bonaparte Point, DeLaca Island, and Janus Island) showed oil. A National Science Foundation (NSF) scientist estimated the initial leaking rate to be approximately 71 barrels a day. [SEP] Exposed rocky shores. [SEP] Krill, amphipods, limpets, gulls, terns, Giant Petrels, penguins, skua chicks, macroalgae, clams, fish, seals. (Source: USCG Case History) [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. This report is based on the latest information passed to Hazmat from Jerry Galt at 0615 PST Friday, February 3. Jerry arrived at Punta Arenas 2 hours after the C-5 arrived. He had made contact with the ship. There was an effort get an overflight of the spill from Punta Arenes, it would be an 8 hour flight and the ship departure would have been delayed so this effort was aborted. There is some discussion of trying to set up operations in Antarctica somewhere near aircraft support. The ship is planning on leaving Punta Arenas at 1800 local time (1300 PST). Contact has been made with the NOAA ship Surveyor. They will be able to provide logistics support as required, they are about 5 days behind the Polar Duke (name of the ship Jerry is on for those of you who haven't heard). The latest information he had on the ship was that it was laying on its starboard side with its stern quarter submerged but the bow out of water. It is grounded in the middle (i.e., about 30 feet of water under the bow and about 70 feet of water under the stern). There has been no confirmation of where the ship is holed or if it is holed. There is speculation that the oil may be leaking out of vents and any other small ports rather than a hole in the ship this has not been confirmed, but is consistent with the amount of oil people are reporting in the water. The primary concern remains the 20 research stations in the area that may be jeopardized by a loss of oil. Jerry has requested that the modeling group of Hazmat provide him with the following information: 1) Climatology (wind rose) data for Palmer Peninsula for the next three months. 2) Weathering curves for an Arctic Diesel (the actual composition of the diesel is not yet known (at least to Jerry), his best guess is that it will be close to a #2 with about a 20% gasoline cut he suggested we run Jim Paine's weathering model and fax him a graphical representation). 3) Background current information for the western side of the Palmer Peninsula. Details of getting the faxed information to Jerry on the ship will be coordinated with the NSF representatives (David Bresnahan). The ship is estimated to arrive at Palmer Station on Monday. Jerry will contact John Robinson as frequently as possible. Glen Watabayashi will be the modeling group contact for this spill through the weekend. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - 8 FEB. REPORT FROM JOHN ROBINSON BASED ON MORNING PHONE CALL FROM JERRY GALT. . The spill situation is stable with most damage being confined to a two-mile area surrounding the ship. Heavy losses have occurred among lower life forms (krill, amphipods, etc.) in the affected area. No significant losses of adult penguins. However there has been a 50% mortality among penguin chicks. This is probably due to contaminated food being delivered by the adults or to some change in adult behavior with respect to their young. There are no endangered species or other populations of special biological interest in the vicinity, so spill effects will be minimal in ecological terms. However, the research loss will be significant since many of the colonies have a 20-year record of study that will be devastated by the spill. Jerry has been working with the various scientific parties there, briefing them on oil spill effects and suggesting courses of future study. He has urged, and helped plan, an extensive sampling effort even though local oil-related analytical capability is minimal. About 30% of the oil has been recovered. Because of the position of the ship, and the need to cut through the double hull to get at the remaining oil, the salvage effort will be difficult and may require quite some time. Jerry will attempt to leave tomorrow (by Chilean vessel to the Chilean station on Antarctica, then by plane to Chile and on to Miami). He hopes to be in Miami by this weekend if everything works. END OF MESSAGE [SEP] Research conducted, habitat impact due to oil, wildlife impacts. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - 02.07.89 POLAR DUKE arrived at 0200 last "night". Equipment in the water by 0430. Awaiting Argentinean request for assistance. Meeting this morning with the Argentinean Antarctic Institute and representatives from the Navy on POLAR DUKE. NSF to call us back with results from meeting. Chilean ship YELCHO arrived last night. Put out light boom but didn't hold. Water samples taken and oil found at 15 feet. NSF working with Tucker Sculley directly at State Department. [SEP] Important note concerning the NOAA "HOTLINE" Communications System: . . Please note that this system is used for NOAA internal communications and the reports are put in chronologically. There is NO corrective "post editing" of the reports. As a result of this, early reports may have information that later proved to be incorrect. Sometimes these errors are corrected in a later report, but sometimes corrections are made over the phone or in-person, and no correcting message is entered. This reflects the use of this system as a real-time spill communications system and is not intended to be an event-log. Please keep this in mind when reading HOTLINE reports for this incident. . If you have any problems with this system please contact the SSC on watch at 206-526-6317. ------------------------------------ . THE ARGENTINE NAVY TRANSPORT, "BAHIA PARAISO", WAS CARRYING FUEL TO RESUPPLY AN ARGENTINE STATION IN ANTARTICA WHEN IT HIT ROCKS 2 MILES FROM THE U.S. SCIENTIFIC BASE AT PALMER STATION. THE SHIP HAD A 30 FOOT GASH IN ITS DOUBLE HULL AFTER IT GROUNDED ON SATURDAY. THE CAPTAIN SAID HE DIDN'T EXPECT THE SHIP TO HOLD TOGETHER. THE SHIP IS CARRYING 250,000 GALS OF DIESEL FUEL AND SOME JET FUEL, GASOLINE, AND CANNISTERS OF COMPRESSED GAS. THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION OPERATES PALMER STATION. NSF SCIENTISTS HAVE REPORTED LEAKING OIL FLOATING ASHORE. THEY SAID THE SMALL AMOUNT OF OIL WAS ALREADY KILLING KRILL. THE FUEL HAS ALSO AFFECTED GULLS, GIANT PETRELS, PENGUINS AND POSSIBLY OTHER FORMS OF WILDLIFE. ANOTHER ARGENTINE NAVAL SHIP IS HEADING TOWARD THE BAHIA PARAISO TO PUMP OFF THE REMAILING OIL, BUT IT WON'T REACH THE SITE UNTIL THURSDAY OR FRIDAY. THE 234 CREW MEMBERS AND 81 TOURISTS ABOARD HAVE BEEN TAKEN TO PALMER STATION. NSF HAS CONTACTED NAVY SUPSALV TO TAKE THIER POLLUTION EQUIPMENT DOWN. AN AIR FORCE C5 WILL TRANSPORT PEOPLE AND GEAR TO A CHILEAN BASE IN THE SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS. IT IS ESTIMATED THAT PALMER STATION IS 4 DAYS SAILING FROM THE AIRSTATION (APPROX. 600 MILES AWAY). THE C5 IS DUE TO LEAVE FROM THE NORFOLK NAVAL BASE TOMORROW MORNING. BECAUSE ELASTOL MAY MAKE DIESEL RECOVERABLE BY SKIMMERS, THE NAVY IS PLANNING TO TAKE SOME ELASTOL DOWN. - END OF MESSAGE [SEP] The Argentinean ship Capitan Alacazar arrived February 5 from Chile's Antarctic Institute to assess the damage to the environment from the oil spill. The Capitan Alacazar took water samples and surveyed the area for oiled wildlife. The Polar Duke arrived at Palmer Station on February 6 carrying equipment
At approximately 1800 on January 20, 1989, the tugboat  MARY KATHRYN H grounded in heavy weather at the entrance to Smith Cove, on the east side of Prince of Wales Island. The vessel rested on its starboard side on a reef and was awash at high tide.  The tug contained approximately 7,000 gallons of diesel, of which less than 100 gallons were lost prior to plugging the fuel tank vents.  High winds from the southeast and heavy seas made access to the vessel difficult.  USCG district 17. [SEP] NOAA/OMA was notified of the incident at 1700 on January 23, 1989 by the U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Office, Juneau. The Coast Guard requested trajectory analyses for an instantaneous release, and for a continuous release over a one- week period, as well as information on environmental resources-at-risk from a spill. NOAA advised the Coast Guard that, with the persistent southeasterly wind, minimal flushing of the diesel in Smith Cove would occur with any type of release. Communication with Alaska natural resource agencies revealed that Smith Cove was not particularly rich in resources, having only a minimal amount of diving ducks and wintering waterfowl. However, logging occurs at a logging transfer station on the lands adjacent to Smith Cove. [SEP] Shortly after the incident occurred, divers plugged the tug's vents and the owner arranged for a boom to be placed around the vessel. Bad weather hampered salvage operations, but on January 26 the vessel was refloated and the diesel lightered. Only a light sheen was evident in Skowl Arm at any time. The vessel was towed to Ketchikan for repairs.
At approximately 0800 on January 17, 1989, the Foss Company's tank barge 256 holed itself at Bird Cape, Amchitka Island during heavy weather.  The vessel was transferring diesel fuel to the U.S. Navy facility at Bird Cape when approximately 70 knot winds pushed the barge and the tug DANIEL FOSS over rocks, ripping holes in several cargo tanks.  The total capacity of the barge was approximately 1,800,000 gallons of diesel.  The DANIEL FOSS, with the barge in tow, moved from Bird Cape to Chitka Cove.  As the weather permitted, the fuel transfer was completed by January 25.  The barge apparently lost approximately 84,000 gallons of diesel.  U.S. Navy personnel surveyed the beach from Bird Cape to Chitka Cove and found no evidence of the the spill on the beach.  The case was closed on January 26.  USCG district 17. [SEP] NOAA/OMA was notified of the incident on January 18, 1989, by the U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Office in Anchorage. Because of poor bad weather conditions, the Coast Guard did not request assistance. Nevertheless, NOAA notified the resource agencies involved that the spill had occurred. [SEP] As the weather permitted, the fuel transfer was completed by January 25. The barge apparently lost approximately 84,000 gallons of diesel. U.S. Navy personnel surveyed the beach from Bird Cape to Chitka Cove and found no evidence of the the spill on the beach. The case was closed on January 26.
At 1100 on June 16, 1988, the U.S. Coast Guard Station New York was notified that a whale had been sighted in lower New York Harbor.   By 1300, Coast Guard Group New York had located the whale in the Hudson River.  USCG district 1. [SEP] The SSC has initiated steps to procure photographs of the whale from the news media, present that day, for the NMFS for identification purposes. Two Coast Guard boats provided protection for the whale in the harbor and escorted it back out to sea. At 2200 the Coast Guard broke off contact with the whale at it passed out of New York Harbor. Its course was southeast, heading out to sea.\ [SEP] NOAA/OMA was notified of the sighting at 1130 on June 16, 1988. The Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) boarded a 32-foot Coast Guard vessel to confirm the sighting in lower New York Harbor After over one hour of patrolling the Harbor, no whale was found. Upon returning to base, the SSC attempted unsuccessfully to contact the NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), the natural resource trustee for marine mammals. The Brigantine, New Jersey Marine Mammal Stranding Center on the phone, and was told that they had been tracking a Humpback whale, approximate 35 feet in length, as it moved north along the coast of New Jersey. It apparently had become separated from a pod migrating north to their summer feeding grounds. The SSC then contacted the Okeanos Foundation in Montauk, New York, an organization experienced in handling whales in large metropolitan harbors. Okeanos suggested that the Coast Guard keep its boats upriver of the whale to prevent it from moving any further upriver. They also suggested banging on pipes in the water or using other noise-making objects for the same purpose. If the whale was not able to find its own way out of the harbor in a short time, they would contact the U.S. Navy to procure tapes of humpback whale feeding sounds and play it back in order to draw the whale out of the Harbor. The whale was identified as a juvenile humpback, approximately 30-40 feet long. It did not appear to be wounded or unhealthy (possible reasons for its presence in the Harbor), and would surface after being submerged for periods from between one to five minutes. The whale swam between the New York and New Jersey shores for about one hour, after which time it began swimming steadily south staying close to the New York (Manhattan) shore. Whether the motivation to turn around and head out of the harbor was due to any anthropogenic activities or its own instincts is still speculation. The Coast Guard accompanied the whale south and out of the Harbor. [SEP] At 1100 on June 16, 1988, the U.S. Coast Guard Station New York was notified that a whale had been sighted in lower New York Harbor. By 1300, Coast Guard Group New York had located the whale in the Hudson River.
One million gallons of diesel fuel was released due to a tank failure from a shoreside facility (Ashland Oil) in West Elizabeth, PA. The location is 24 river miles upriver (SW) of the confluence with the Ohio River. The spill is presently an rp lead cleanup with the EPA as the lead OSC. Coast Guard COTP has a backup role and has requested Jay Rodstein's presence on scene. A major concern is the impact of the oil on drinking water intakes which are approximately 15 feet below the river level. USCG district 9. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. POLREP #55 ASHLAND OIL TERMINAL MAJOR OIL SPILL FLOREFFE, ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PA I. SITUATION (SUNDAY, 2/14/88, 1700 HOURS) A. ON SITE CLEANUP EFFORTS CONTINUE AT ASHLAND FACILITY. TASK FORCE DISCONTINUED CUTTING OPERATIONS FOR WEEKEND. B. PERSONNEL ON SCENE: TAT, PADER AND ASHLAND RP CONTRACTORS. C. ESTIMATED COSTS TO DATE (C.O.B. 2/11/88) EPA- $ 75,100 USCG- 279,200 TAT- 120,200 TOTAL- $ 474,500 D. WEATHER- COLD, WINDY SATURDAY, HIGH 30. SUNNY AND WARMER SUNDAY HIGH 43. E. ORSANCO UPDATE REMAINS UNCHANGED FROM 2/8/88. II. ACTIONS TAKEN A. DAILY SITE INSPECTIONS SHOWED CONTINUED CLEANUP OF RAILROAD BERM AREA, PARKING LOT AREA AND DIKE AREA NEAR OIL-WATER SEPARATOR. B. OUTFALL BOOM DEPLOYMENT UNCHANGED FROM POLREP #50. C. TANK CUTTING OPERATIONS DISCONTINUED FOR WEEKEND. TASK FORCE TO RESUME OPERATIONS MONDAY, 2/15/88. III.FUTURE PLANS A. TAT AND PA DER TO CONTINUE TO MONITOR RP CLEANUP ACTIVITIES. B. OSC AWAITS SUBSURFACE CONTAMINATION REPORT FROM RP CONTRACTOR CURRENTLY DRILLING ON SITE. C. EPA IN WHEELING TO OVERSEE MONITORING. D. OSC JACKSON TO RETURN TUESDAY, 2/16/88. E. AWAIT ORSANCO FINAL SPILL UPDATE. JERRY SASEEN, OSC U.S. EPA REGION III WHEELING, WEST VIRGINIA . SEND [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - ANALYTICAL RESULTS FOR ASHLAND OIL SPILL FACILITY NAME WEST VIEW CHEMICAL COMPOUND 01/06/88 01/07/88 AM PM AM PM VOA RND RND METHYLENE CHLORIDE BENZENE DIBROMOCHLOROMETHANE BROMODICHLOROMETHANE CHLOROFORM ACETONE TOLUENE CHLOROBENZENE ETHYLBENZENE STYRENE TETRACHLOROTHENE TOTAL XYLENES BNA RNA NAPHTHALENE R1J R7 2-METHYLNAPHTHALENE R2J R1J R1J R41 PHENANTHRENE R2J R1J BIS(2-ETHYLHEXY)PHTHALATE FLOURENE R4J ACENAPHTHALENE R2J DIBENZOFURAN #2 FUEL OIL R380 #2 FUEL OIL #2 FUEL OIL PHOTOVAC R.33 BENZENE R.85 OIL & GREASE NOTE: R = INTAKE, RAW NOTE: E = EFFLUENT NOTE: READINGS ARE IN PPB NOTE: J = BELOW DETECTION LIMIT. NOTE: ND = NOT DETECTED. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - ANALYTICAL RESULTS FOR ASHLAND OIL SPILL FACILITY NAME STEUBENVILLE CHEMICAL COMPOUND 01/06/88 01/07/88 01/08/88 AM PM AM PM AM PM VOA RND RND METHYLENE CHLORIDE R7 R1J BENZENE R3J R1J DIBROMOCHLOROMETHANE E2J E2J BROMODICHLOROMETHANE R7 E9 E8 CHLOROFORM R14 E15 E14 ACETONE R46 TOLUENE CHLOROBENZENE ETHYLBENZENE STYRENE TETRACHLOROTHENE TOTAL XYLENES BNA RND RND NAPHTHALENE R1 2-METHYLNAPHTHALENE R5 R1J PHENANTHRENE R2 BIS(2-ETHYLHEXY)PHTHALATE FLOURENE ACENAPHTHALENE DIBENZOFURAN #2 FUEL OIL R1400 R230 E<5 #2 FUEL OIL R120 R130 #2 FUEL OIL PHOTOVAC BENZENE R1.82 RND OIL & GREASE NOTE: R = INTAKE, RAW NOTE: E = EFFLUENT NOTE: READINGS ARE IN PPB NOTE: J = BELOW DETECTION LIMIT. NOTE: ND = NOT DETECTED. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - TO: MURPH R3OSC CGGST CC: From: R3OSC Emergency Response {OAD } Date: TUE, FEB 02 1988 07:20:49 Subject: ASHLAND POLREP 44 POLREP #44 ASHLAND OIL TERMINAL MAJOR OIL SPILL FLOREFFE, ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PA ATTN: TIM FIELDS, BOB CARON AND STEVE JARVELA I. SITUATION (MONDAY 2/1/88, 1800 HRS) A. ON SITE CLEANUP EFFORTS CONTINUE. CUTTING OF THE BASE OF THE RUPTURED TANK COMPLETED. TANK WALLS CURRENTLY BEING CUT UP AND REMOVED FROM THE DIKING AREA. B. PERSONNEL ON SCENE: EPA, TAT, ASHLAND AND RP CONTRACTORS. C. ESTIMATED COSTS TO DATE (C.O.B. 1/31/88) EPA- $ 72,000 USCG- 279,200 TAT- 115,000 TOTAL- $ 466,200 D. WEATHER- RAIN, HIGH IN 50'S E. ORSANCO UPDATE FROM 2/1/88 AT 1800 HRS IS AS FOLLOWS: BOAT CREW INDICATED THAT THE LEADING EDGE OF THE SPILL WAS LOCATED AT RIVERMILE 721 AT 1800 HRS ON MONDAY, 2/1/88. ORSANCO BOAT TRAVELED TO RIVER MILE 776 AND OBTAINED CONSTANT READINGS. ORSANCO PRESENTLY CONSIDERING SUSPENSION OF FLOROMETRY STUDY DUE TO HEAVY RAINS (HIGH DILUTION) AND RIVER VELOCITY. ANALYTICAL DATA OBTAINED FROM LOUIVILLE INDICATES THAT PEAK READINGS DURING THE HIGHEST CONCENTRATION OF OIL ONLY 50 PPB OF #2 DIESEL. II. ACTIONS TAKEN A. CLEANUP ACTIVITIES CONTINUED AS OHM REMOVED REMAINING SORBENT BOOM AT EAST LIVERPOOL AND STEUBENVILLE. CONTINUE TO RETRIEVE SORBENTS FROM THE MONONGAHELA RIVER. ALL EXCESS BOOM WAS DEMOBED THIS DATE. SOUTHSIDE PARK RESTORATION CONTINUES. B. ONSITE DRILLING AND BORE SAMPLES CONTINUED TO BE TAKEN BY RP CONTRACTORS FOR EXTENT-OF-CONTAMINATION SURVEY. C. OSC JACKSON MOBILIZED TO THE SITE, 1000 HOURS, 2/1/88 TO RESUME EPA REPRESENTATION ON SITE. D. OSC JACKSON AND TAT HAVELKA PERFORMED SITE INSPECTIONS AT 1300 HOURS AND 1620 HOURS. CLEANUP ACTIVITIES ONSITE HAMPERED BY HEAVY RAINS. DIESEL HAS STARTED SURFACING IN PROBLEM AREAS AGAIN. E. ASHLAND CONTRACTORS COMPLETED REMOVAL OF TANK FOUNDATION THIS DATE, 2/1/88. III.FUTURE PLANS A. EPA, TAT, AND PADER TO CONTINUE TO MONITOR RP CLEANUP ACTIVITIES. B. RP CONTRACTOR TO REMOVE SPENT SORBENT FROM DRAVO FACILITY AND CONTINUE TO RETRIEVE BOOM FROM THE MONONGAHELA RIVER. SOUTHSIDE PARK CLEANUP TO CONTINUE. C. OSC AWAITS SUBSURFACE CONTAMINATION REPORT FROM RP CONTRACTORS CURRENTLY TEST DRILLING ON SITE. JERRY SASEEN, OSC U.S. EPA REGION III WHEELING, WEST VIRGINIA [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - POLREP #45 ASHLAND OIL TERMINAL MAJOR OIL SPILL FLOREFFE, ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PA I. SITUATION (TUESDAY 2/2/88, 1700 HRS) A. ON SITE CLEANUP EFFORTS CONTINUE. CUTTING OF THE WALLS OF THE RUPTURED TANK TEMPORARILY HALTED BECAUSE OF HEAVY RAINS. B. PERSONNEL ON SCENE: EPA, TAT, ASHLAND AND RP CONTRACTORS. AND THE PA DER. C. ESTIMATED COSTS TO DATE (C.O.B. 2/2/88) EPA- $ 72,300 USCG- 279,200 TAT- 115,500 TOTAL- $ 467,000 D. WEATHER- RAIN CHANGING TO SNOW, FALLING TEMPS. 32 F. E. ORSANCO UPDATE FROM 2/2/88 AT 1311 HRS IS AS FOLLOWS: TIME OF TRAVEL ESTIMATES ASSUMING THAT THE LEADING EDGE IS AT M.P. 721 AT 1900 HOURS, 2/1/88,INDICATE THAT THE LEADING EDGE WILL BE AT M.P. 791.5 (EVANSVILLE) BY PM ON 2/2/88. THE ESTIMATES ALSO PROJECT THAT THE LEADING EDGE WILL REACH M.P. 952.0 (JOPPA) BY 2/6/88, WHICH IS 29 RIVER MILES FROM THE CONFLUENCE OF THE OHIO AND MISSISSIPPI RIVERS. LOUISVILLE WATER CO. REPORTS DECREASING FUEL OIL CONCENTRATIONS AT THEIR PAYNE PLANT INTAKE: 7.3 PPB AT 2200 HOURS,1/31/88 2.5 PPB AT 0600 HOURS,2/1/88 NORMAL OPERATIONS REPORTED FROM THE CINCINNATI WATER WORKS ALL OF THE WAY UPSTREAM. II. ACTIONS TAKEN A. CLEANUP ACTIVITIES CONTINUED AS OHM RESET BOOM AT THE GUTMAN'S BARGE AREA. BOOM RETREIVAL FROM THE MONONGAHELA RIVER CONTINUES DESPITE THE EXTREMELY HIGH FLOW OF THE RIVERS. OH CONTINUED EQUIPMENT DECON AND RETURNED ALLEGHENY COUNTY BOOM. B. OSC JACKSON AND TAT HAVELKA PERFORMED SITE INSPECTIONS AT 0800 HOURS AND 1500 HOURS. CLEANUP ACTIVITIES ONSITE CONTINUE TO BE HAMPERED BY RAIN. LARGE VOLUMES OF WATER HAVE COLLECTED IN THE DIKING AREAS AND THE DRAINAGE DITCH CONTINUES TO BE PUMPED INTO DIKED AREA ADJACENT TO THE COLLAPSED TANK. C. PADER HARPER NOTIFIED OSC THAT GROUNDWATER SAMPLES HAVE BEEN TAKEN FROM SAMPLING WELLS AND SAMPLES WERE SPLIT WITH ASHLAND. D. PADER HARPER GAVE ASHLAND PERMISSION TO BYPASS THE OIL WATER SEPARATOR TO TRY TO DECREASE THE VOLUME OF WATER ON SITE. OPERATION IS BEING CLOSELY MONITORED AND SAMPLES ARE BEING TAKEN. THIS WAS DONE TO MITIGATE THE THREAT OF DAMAGE TO TANKS IN THE TANK FARM WHICH HAVE SIGNIFICANT AMOUNTS OF WATER IN THEIR DIKING AREAS. III.FUTURE PLANS A. EPA, TAT, AND PADER TO CONTINUE TO MONITOR RP CLEANUP ACTIVITIES. B. RP CONTRACTOR TO CONTINUE TO RETRIEVE BOOM FROM THE MONONGAHELA RIVER. OHM WILL ALSO INITIATE DEMOBILIZATION OF EQUIPMENT FROM THE SITE AND THE 18TH STREET AREA. ASHLAND WILL RESUME TANK WALL CUTTING PENDING DRYER WEATHER CONDITIONS. C. OSC AWAITS SUBSURFACE CONTAMINATION REPORT FROM RP CONTRACTORS CURRENTLY TEST DRILLING ON SITE. JERRY SASEEN, OSC U.S. EPA REGION III WHEELING, WEST VIRGINIA [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - ANALYTICAL RESULTS FOR ASHLAND OIL SPILL FACILITY NAME OHIO R. MILE POINT 68 CHEMICAL COMPOUND 01/06/88 01/07/88 01/08/88 AM PM AM PM AM PM VOA METHYLENE CHLORIDE BENZENE DIBROMOCHLOROMETHANE BROMODICHLOROMETHANE CHLOROFORM ACETONE TOLUENE CHLOROBENZENE ETHYLBENZENE STYRENE TETRACHLOROTHENE TOTAL XYLENES BNA NAPHTHALENE 1J 2-METHYLNAPHTHALENE 3J PHENANTHRENE BIS(2-ETHYLHEXY)PHTHALATE FLOURENE ACENAPHTHALENE DIBENZOFURAN #2 FUEL OIL #2 FUEL OIL #2 FUEL OIL PHOTOVAC BENZENE OIL & GREASE NOTE: R = INTAKE, RAW NOTE: E = EFFLUENT NOTE: READINGS ARE IN PPB NOTE: J = BELOW DETECTION LIMIT. NOTE: ND = NOT DETECTED. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - SPECIAL BULLETIN E ASHLAND OIL COMPANY TERMINAL MAJOR OIL SPILL FLOREFFE, ALLEGHENY COUNTY,PA SUBJECT: RRT MEETING 2300 HOURS 1/7/88 A. OEPA MIKE DALTON CONTACTS OSC SASEEN TO ASK IF COE CAN OPEN DAMS AND INCREASE FLOW OF
At 1626 on December 21, 1985 the Tank Vessel ARCO Anchorage ran aground while anchoring in Port Angeles Harbor, Washington. The vessel was carrying 814,000 barrels of Alaska North Slope Crude Oil en route from Valdez, Alaska to the Cherry Point Refinery in Bellingham, Washington. Weather conditions at the time of the incident were calm with a visibility of 3 miles. The vessel was holed in two cargo tanks resulting in the loss of 5690 barrels of oil into Port Angeles Harbor. Internal transfer of cargo from the holed tanks stopped the discharge of oil into the water by 2052, December 21. The ARCO Anchorage remained aground until 0244, December 22 when it was refloated and moved to deeper anchorage within Port Angeles Harbor. Through discussions with the Canadian Coast Guard it was decided that invocation of the joint U.S. Canadian response plan (CANUSPAC) was not necessary, but that close contact would be maintained. An ARCO spill response team was activated from Long Beach, California. Under the influence of wind and tides, the oil was carried to the west almost to Neah Bay and to the east to Dungeness Spit. No impacts were observed in Canada from this incident. Cleanup activities were suspended on April 7, 1986. USCG district 13. Keyword: National Wildlife Refuges, adverse weather conditions, International Bird Rescue and Research Center (IBRRC), volunteers, skimmer, vacuum truck, reoiling, sub-surface oil, Open Water Oil Containment and Recovery System (OWOCRS), Air-Deliverable Anti Pollution Transfer Systems (ADAPTS), boom, sorbents, manual removal. [SEP] DECEMBER 24, 1985 EVENING MEETING Lt. Fitzpatrick, USCG, speaking for LCDR Yaroch, said that a boom needs to be put around the Foss barge. Also, the Coast Guard should be notified when boom is moved. December 24 Overflights The last flight of the day was conducted with good visibility conditions. The following observations were made: A large patch of brown oil broken up into smaller patches was noted off Dungeness Spit, 1.5 miles northwest of Protection Island. The patch was surrounded by sheen and streamers. A large brown patch with large sheen concentrations was seen about 7 miles north of Smith Island. Oil moved west around Dungeness Spit. This is one of the heavier spots, with sheen. Streamers two yards wide, 600 yards long were noted running north-south off the end of Dungeness Spit. A number of lines of brown product 20-100 yards long and two yards wide were seen between Ediz Hook and Dungeness Spit. Scattered streamers were observed from Ediz Hook to about 20 miles north of Angeles Point. Sheen was not observed in kelpbeds near Angeles Point where it had been reported previously. A large brown patch of oil, probably the leading edge of the slick, was seen at 48-16 N, 123-52 W. Cleanup Operations Jay Kitchener of ARCO said that there are three skimmers in use. Crowley Environmental is working around the log booms inside the Hook. Cleanup will be continued on December 25. Dee Chamberlain walked Dungeness Spit today. USFWS advises not to attempt cleanup unless pools of oil are observed on the beach (this was not the case). The Spit was observed to be stained with oil. Tom Ballou of RPI recommends that no cleanup beyond collecting oiled debris and light scraping of top layer of sand be attempted. DOE and USFWS will discuss appropriate method and will recommend this to ARCO. DOE has a Washington Conservation Corps cleanup crew available to work on the beach on Christmas. Jay Kitchener discussed the problem of cleaning the log booms at Ediz Hook. There is some difficulty in identifying the owners of the logs, as well as determing which agency has authority to move the logs for cleanup. This last point was emphasized by Len Berkowitz of ARCO, who suggested that the Coast Guard and state agencies determine who has this authority. Mr. Sawyer of ITT says that authority for access to the booms can be given December 25. ARCO emphasized that a cleanup crew could not immediately work on the booms due to little expertise in dealing with logs. ARCO and the Coast Guard will meet at 1100 on December 25 to formulate a plan to remove the oil (June Siva or Dee Chamberlain will recon the logs earlier in the morning to provide a basis for this decision). Moving the ARCO ANCHORAGE _________________________ LCDR Yaroch said that tentatively, it is planned for the vessel to be escorted out by a vessel with skimming equipment aboard and a 82-footer PT. COUNTESS. This will be done on December 26. Access to Oiled Areas _____________________ It was agreed to restrict pedestrian access to oiled logs and Dungeness Spit (there were about 35-40 observers today). Disposal Plan _____________ ARCO has submitted a disposal plan to the State and to the Coast Guard. Debris will be packaged in lined containers and taken to Seattle for sorting. Debris that cannot be reclaimed will be disposed of as hazardous waste. Bird Cleaning ______________ Frank Migaiolo of NOAA said that 1100 birds have now been received at the bird cleaning station at Pt. Angeles High School. Seven hundred have been cleaned so far. The bird cleaning center will work through the night to try eliminate the backlog of uncleaned birds by December 25. Press Briefing A press briefing is scheduled for 1030 on December 27 at the Coast Guard command post. The briefing will include State and Federal representatives, and ARCO. [SEP] NOAA personnel on-scene: Kennedy, Galt, Pavia, Keister, Fox, Payton, Dale, Trofimczuk . Chronology . 0645 hrs. Kennedy contacted by ARCO OSC. OSC reports wind shift in the past 2 hours. NE to NW currently blowing 17 kts. Oil moving out of log boom areas. . 0700 hrs. Fox and Keister to bird cleaning facility. . 0715 hrs. Kennedy contacts NWS marine forecast office in Seattle. NWS had no additional information on this morning's wind shift, but will look into this. We will establish closer liaison with marine forecast office for duration of spill. . 0730 hrs. Galt and Payton arrive. . 0830 hrs. Galt, Payton, Pavia depart on overflight. . 0900 hrs. Kennedy briefs Howard Harris, NOAA, on current situation. . 0915 hrs. Kennedy contacts EPA. They flew high resolution aerial photgraphy yesterday and will send us copies today. . 0930 hrs. Received RPI recommendations on shoreline cleanup via electronic mail. . 0945 hrs. Transmitted memo of understanding to Washington State Dept. of Ecology via electronic mail. . 1000 hrs. Kennedy contacted Lee Chesneau, NES marine forecaster (526-6103) about more detailed weather forecasts for the Port Angeles area. Senior chief Copperthite returns from ARCO helo overflight. . 1025 hrs. Galt, Payton, Pavia return from helo overflight. . 1030 hrs. Dr. Walter Pearson, Battelle NW, called Kennedy. His concern is with sandlance which will spawn in about a month between Green Point and Dungeness Spit. According to Pearson, sandlance are a major food web item for shore feeding birds and salmon. Kittle recommends Doug Burge, Washington Dept. of Fisheries, be contacted with this concern. . 1100 hrs. Message left for Doug Burge. . 1130 hrs. Call to NWS. Wind presently from 020 at 11 kts. Forecast 5 to 15 kts from 040 to 080 throughout the day shifting E to ESE tomorrow and increasing to 10 to 20 kts. A frontal system is expected to pass through the area late tomorrow. . 1130 hrs. Received call from Keister at bird cleaning facility. He has volunteers to deploy in the field to recover oiled birds and needs to know where. Galt recommends Point Angeles, west side of Freshwater Bay, and the bluffs west to Crescent Bay. . 1140 hrs. Burl Wescott, NOAA Hazmat, calls Kennedy with information about location of rock in Port Angeles Harbor. . 1145 hrs. Kennedy calls Curt Griner, who is handling investigation into the spill incident for the State of Washington. Wescott's phone number passed to Griner. . 1255 hrs. Preliminary plan is emerging for cleanup of logs in the harbor. Uncontaminated logs will be moved to area "B." Oiled logs will be pressure washed on a barge and returned to area "B." Bark removed will become hog fuel. ARCO will meet with ITT and others today to work on this plan. . 1320 hrs. Receved request from Dorothy Duncan, Clallam County Commissioner for all Hotline reports and all maps generated by NOAA since spill began. A meeting is scheduled for Thursday at 1100 hrs to brief the County on the long-term impact of the oil spill. . 1330 hrs. Galt and Payton depart on helo overflight. . 1345 hrs. Doug Burge briefed on call from Dr. Walter Pearson and sandlance concern. . 1400 hrs. Kittle, WDOE, briefs Puget Sound Water Quality Board. . 1430 hrs. Kennedy and Rome depart on fixed wing overflight. . 1530 hrs. Skip Fox reports from bird cleaning facility. Move to new facility will commence at 1700. Some oiled cormorants are showing up at Whidbey Island. . 1550 hrs. Galt and Payton return from overflight. . 1620 hrs. Kennedy and Rome return from
Oil lost from a pipeline at Barbers Point on 2 May 1984
On the morning of November 1, 1979, the Burmah Agate and the Mimosa collided at the entrance to Galveston Harbor. The Mimosa struck the Burmah Agate on its starboard side, tearing an 8 by 15 foot hole in the hull near Cargo Tank No. 5. An explosion occurred upon impact, and the leaking oil ignited. The USCG immediately dispatched the Coast Guard Cutter Valiant to begin search and rescue operations. By 1230 all 26 crew members of the Mimosa had been found, but only 6 of the Burmah Agate's 37 crew members were accounted for. The owners of the Burmah Agate assumed responsibility for the spill response. They contracted Clean Water, Inc. for cleanup operations, and Smit International Inc. to fight fires on the Burmah Agate, and to assist in salvage. The Burmah Agate burned until January 8, 1980 and was towed to Brownsville, Texas on February 1 for scrapping. USCG district 8. Keyword: Collision, explosion, fire, vacalls, vacuum truck, Open Water Oil Containment and Recovery System (OWOCRS), Open Water Oil Recovery System (OWORS), skimmers, U.S. Navy Superintendent of Salvage (NAVSUPSALV), Clean Water, lightering, salvage, Gulf Strike Team (GST), boom, manual removal.. [SEP] Tanker BURMAH AGATE incident, Galveston Harbor entrance, Texas, November 1979. Impacted shoreline. [SEP] The G & H Towing Company tugs The Judge, Carol Hayden, and R.C. Hayden fought the fire under the direction of the Commanding Officer of the USCGC Valiant until Smit International, Inc. personnel arrived. The G & H tugs were not manned by trained firefighters, and they had a tendency to leave effective fire fighting positions when explosions occurred aboard the tanker. The G & H tugs continued under the direction of Smit International, Inc. personnel until better vessels were procured. On November 2, the GST arrived with 612 feet of Open Water Oil Containment and Recovery System (OWOCRS) and two Air-Deliverable Anti-Pollution Transfer Systems (ADAPTS). Western Marine provided boats for the deployment of the GST's equipment. The shipping lanes into Galveston were closed in both directions for a short time on the first day of the incident, and again on November 5 while the Mimosa was towed to Galveston. Subsequently, the outgoing lanes were opened.\GST personnel worked through the night and into the morning of November 3 to deploy a boom astern of the tanker. In the early evening of November 3, nine firefighters from the Netherlands arrived with additional equipment. Various problems occurred during the evening of November 3; kinks in the boom, no boom lights, and a boom line fouled the prop of a deployment vessel. The Dutch tug Jacob Van Heemskerk was on-scene in the morning of November 4, and began applying water to the Burmah Agate. In the early morning of November 5, more explosions aboard the Burmah Agate opened several starboard and center tanks. The On-Scene Coordinator (OSC) and acting Captain of the Port (COTP) contacted the U.S. Navy Supervisor of Salvage (NAVSUPSALV) to bring in booms and skimmers with personnel to operate them. On November 7, the Linda Partain arrived on-scene to fight fires along with the Jacob Van Heemskerk and the Seaspan Raider. Goodyear boom was deployed astern of the Burmah Agate. On November 8, only the Linda Partain remained alongside the tanker, applying water to the forward tanks to cool them. The other two tugs had moved away due to explosions. Vessels continued to deploy the Goodyear boom near the Burmah Agate. On November 10, 2,000 feet of Goodyear boom was deployed north of the Burmah Agate to protect the Galveston Channel and Bolivar Peninsula. Booming of the San Luis Pass area was completed with the deployment of 4,000 feet of boom. Oil entrainment was discovered under the booms astern of the tanker. On November 11, a Marco Class V skimmer was deployed to back up the boom under which oil had entrained. The boom to the north of the tanker was damaged by a response vessel during the night of November 11, and was replaced. It was damaged again on November 12, and on November 16. Another portside tank exploded, and burning oil hit the booms and set them on fire. A Lockheed skimmer Open Water Oil Recovery System (OWORS) was deployed but one of its flotations was punctured, and was removed for repairs. On November 13, two OWOCRS were deployed. The boom caught fire again on November 14.\\On November 17, the Bering Sea, with two Marco skimmers attached to outriggers, and the Midnight Flash, with the Lockheed skimmer attached to an outrigger, came on scene and began skimming operations. By November 21, there were 400 people cleaning the beaches. Beach cleanup was done by manual removal of oiled sand, which was loaded into dump trucks by front-end loaders. Loaders removed too much sand from the beaches and they were replaced with vacuum trucks. Cleanup of beaches was complete by November 27. On January 8, the fire was put out, and deployment of 4000 feet of Goodyear boom and OWOCRS began in anticipation of lightering efforts. There was a delay in offloading operations because the owners of the Burmah Agate were slow to award a contract. The lightering began on January 17 and continued until February 3. Approximately 160,000 barrels of crude oil were recovered by lightering operations. [SEP] On November 1, 1979, the BURMAH AGATE collided with the freighter MIMOSA southeast of Galveston Entrance in the Gulf of Mexico. An estimated 2.6 million gallons of oil was released into the environment; another 7.8 million gallons was consumed by the fire onboard. This spill is currently #55 on the all-time list of largest oil spills. [SEP] Tanker BURMAH AGATE incident, Galveston Harbor entrance, Texas, November 1979. Fire is still visible as attempts to extinguish it continue. [SEP] Booms and skimmers were deployed to protect beaches. Seasonal winds kept most of the oil offshore, however, heavy concentrations of oil washed ashore at Galveston and San Jose Island. Lighter concentrations of oil impacted Padre Island and the Bolivar Peninsula. Oil came ashore on November 5 at Galveston Jetties and East Beach, and cleanup began immediately. Oil impacted the Matagorda Peninsula on November 6. On November 9, six barrels of oil impacted 437 yards of marshes and sand beaches around Smith Point and five areas on Galveston Island. The Smith Point area was the only inland area impacted by oil. The marsh areas were not cleaned up because response efforts could have caused greater damage than the oiling. Boom was deployed in the San Luis Pass area and there was an attempt to deploy a Marco skimmer in that area. A crane from Galveston was necessary to deploy the skimmer. By November 12, a slick composed of sheen and mousse in windrows extended 8.5 miles WSW of the tanker. Oil in the form of small tarballs impacted Padre Island near Mansfield Pass on November 13. Approximately eight barrels of oil came ashore at Padre Island where no cleanup was done. Heavy concentrations of oil impacted Galveston beaches on November 18. The heaviest impacts of oil occurred near Jamaica Beach November 19-21. On November 24, Jamaica Beach was cleaned with Vacalls. Streamers were observed near Bolivar Peninsula on November 27. Most of the oil burned in the ship or in the water near the ship, however by December 7, a 19 mile long slick extended to the SSW of the tanker. Most of the oil spilled from the tanker was blended crude with the remainder the heavier Nigerian crude. Thirty-eight per cent of the oil carried by the Burmah Agate was recovered through lightering operations. Of the remaining oil, an estimated 1.7 per cent was picked up by skimmers, .5 per cent impacted beaches, 48 per cent burned, and 12 per cent dispersed offshore. Ultimately, 2,100 barrels impacted various beaches and marshes. [SEP] Tanker BURMAH AGATE incident, Galveston Harbor entrance, Texas, November 1979. Impacted shoreline. [SEP] ???€?Kana, T., Pavia, R., Thompson, E. 1981. Burmah Agate - Chronology and Containment Operations., Oil Spill Conference Proceedings 1981. pp.131-139. ???€?USCG On-Scene Coordinator's Final Report [SEP] On the morning of November 1, 1979, the Burmah Agate and the Mimosa collided at the entrance to Galveston Harbor. The Mimosa struck the Burmah Agate on its starboard side, tearing an 8 by 15 foot hole in the hull near Cargo Tank No. 5. An explosion occurred upon impact, and the leaking oil ignited. The USCG immediately dispatched the Coast Guard Cutter Valiant to begin search and rescue operations. By 1230 all 26 crew members of the Mimosa had been found, but only 6 of the Burmah Agate's 37 crew members were accounted for. The owners of the Burmah Agate assumed responsibility for the spill response. They contracted Clean Water, Inc. for cleanup operations, and Smit International Inc. to fight fires on the Burmah Agate, and to assist in salvage. The Burmah Agate burned until January 8, 1980 and was towed to Brownsville, Texas on February 1 for scrapping. (USCG Case History) [SEP] Shoreline types inluded fine sand beaches, marshes. [SEP] Other circumstances that affected
On June 3, 1979, the 2 mile deep exploratory well, IXTOC I, blew out in the Bahia de Campeche, 600 miles south of Texas in the Gulf of Mexico. The water depth at the wellhead site is about 50 m (164 feet). The IXTOC I was being drilled by the SEDCO 135, a semi-submersible platform on lease to Petroleos Mexicanos (PEMEX). A loss of drilling mud circulation caused the blowout to occur. The oil and gas blowing out of the well ignited, causing the platform to catch fire. The burning platform collapsed into the wellhead area hindering any immediate attempts to control the blowout. PEMEX hired blowout control experts and other spill control experts including Red Adair, Martech International of Houston, and the Mexican diving company, Daivaz. The Martech response included 50 personnel on site, the remotely operated vehicle TREC, and the submersible Pioneer I. The TREC attempted to find a safe approach to the Blowout Preventer (BOP). The approach was complicated by poor visibility and debris on the seafloor including derrick wreckage and 3000 meters of drilling pipe. Divers were eventually able to reach and activate the BOP, but the pressure of the oil and gas caused the valves to begin rupturing. The BOP was reopened to prevent destroying it. Two relief wells were drilled to relieve pressure from the well to allow response personnel to cap it. Norwegian experts were contracted to bring in skimming equipment and containment booms, and to begin cleanup of the spilled oil. The IXTOC I well continued to spill oil at a rate of 10,000 - 30,000 barrels per day until it was finally capped on March 23, 1980. [SEP] IXTOC I oil well blowout, Bay of Campeche, Mexico, June 1979 to March 1980. Well head aerial view. [SEP] ???€?Chapman, B. 1981. Effects of the IXTOC I Oil Spill on Texas Shorebird Populations., Oil Spill Conference Proceedings 1981. pp. 461-465. ???€?Emery, B., Lara, M., and Lindblom, G. 1981. Aerial Application of Dispersants at the IXTOC I Spill., Oil Spill Conference Proceedings 1981. pp.259-262 ???€?Gundlach, E., Finkelstein, K., and Sadd, J. 1981. Impact and Persistence of IXTOC I Oil on the South Texas Coast., Oil Spill Conference Proceedings 1981. pp. 477-485. ???€?Mexico Refuses to Pay Damages in Oil Spill. The Seattle Times. August 24, 1979. ???€?NOAA Special Report ???€?Pemex Claims 1 IXTOC oil flow cut to 10,000 barrels per day. Oil & Gas Journal. August 20, 1979. p. 62. ???€?Pemex Says IXTOC Wells Set Drilling Speed Record. Oil & Gas Journal. September 17, 1979. p. 49. ???€?Research Ships to Aid Oil Slick Fight off Texas. Oil & Gas Journal. August 27, 1979. p. 41. ???€?Texas Oil Cleanup Aimed at Labor Day. The Seattle Times. August 26, 1979. ???€?U.S. Seeks 'amicable' Cleanup Settlement. The Seattle Times. August 25, 1979. p.A5. ???€?Uncontrolled Mexican Blowout Will Require Relief Well. Sea Technology. August 1979. ???€?USCG Federal On-Scene Coordinator Interim Activities Report ???€?USCG On-Scene Coordinator's Final Report [SEP] The U.S. government had two months to prepare for the expected impact of the IXTOC I oil on the Texas shoreline. During this time the government realized the importance of coastline mapping in regards to oil sensitivity. This led to a mapping project which resulted in the first Environmental Sensitivity Index (ESI) prepared by Research Planning , Inc. (RPI) under contract to The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Placement of containment boom and other response equipment was done after study of the environmental sensitivity as reported in the ESI. The IXTOC I well blowout was an unusual situation with regard to responsibility for, coordination of, and control and cleanup of the spilled oil. The U.S. government publicly requested compensation from Mexico for damages associated with the spill without first entering into negotiations with the Mexican Government. Mexico denied being financially responsible for damages incurred, and refused to help pay cleanup expenses to the U.S. Officials reported that tourism along the Texas beaches dropped by 60% during the course of the spill. [SEP] Marshes, mangroves, exposed fine sand beaches, sheltered fine-grained sand beaches, eroding bluffs, mixed sand and shell beaches, exposed tidal flats (low biomass), exposed tidal flats, sheltered tidal flats. [SEP] On June 3, 1979, the 2 mile deep exploratory well, IXTOC I, blew out in the Bahia de Campeche, 600 miles south of Texas in the Gulf of Mexico. The IXTOC I was being drilled by the SEDCO 135, a semi-submersible platform on lease to Petroleos Mexicanos (PEMEX). A loss of drilling mud circulation caused the blowout to occur. The oil and gas blowing out of the well ignited, causing the platform to catch fire. The burning platform collapsed into the wellhead area hindering any immediate attempts to control the blowout. PEMEX hired blowout control experts and other spill control experts including Red Adair, Martech International of Houston, and the Mexican diving company, Daivaz. The Martech response included 50 personnel on site, the remotely operated vehicle TREC, and the submersible Pioneer I. The TREC attempted to find a safe approach to the Blowout Preventer (BOP). The approach was complicated by poor visibility and debris on the seafloor including derrick wreckage and 3000 meters of drilling pipe. Divers were eventually able to reach and activate the BOP, but the pressure of the oil and gas caused the valves to begin rupturing. The BOP was reopened to prevent destroying it. Two relief wells were drilled to relieve pressure from the well to allow response personnel to cap it. Norwegian experts were contracted to bring in skimming equipment and containment booms, and to begin cleanup of the spilled oil. The IXTOC I well continued to spill oil at a rate of 10,000 - 30,000 barrels per day until it was finally capped on March 23, 1980. [SEP] The IXTOC I exploratory well blew out on June 3, 1979 in the Bay of Campeche off Ciudad del Carmen, Mexico. By the time the well was brought under control in 1980, an estimated 140 million gallons of oil had spilled into the bay. The IXTOC I is currently #2 on the all-time list of largest oil spills of all-time, eclipsed only by the deliberate release of oil, from many different sources, during the 1991 Gulf War. [SEP] From: From National Research Council. Using Oil Spill Dispersants on the Sea. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 1989. Ixtoc I, 1979???€?1980 The Ixtoc I well blowout occurred in the southern Gulf of Mexico in June 1979, spilling an estimated 30,000 bbl/day between June and December. Over these 6 months, spray booms 25-ft long on each aircraft wing, with 228 nozzle bodies, pumped 400 gal/min per pump. Some aircraft were equipped with two such systems, thus doubling the maximum rate available (Lindblom et al., 1981). Observers saw results within several hours, and by the following day no oil was visible in the treated area. This included oil that had drifted 500 mi and had been on the water for 4 to 6 months before spraying (Lindblom et al., 1981). Dispersal of oil at 4 to 6 months was visually confirmed by the air crews on return trips (Lindblom et al., 1981). Slicks on very calm water to which dispersants were applied were usually dispersed by overnight storms. A small amount of oil was stranded north of Tampico, Mexico while aerial operations were confined to the southern Gulf. After redeployment of aircraft along the shoreline to the U.S. border, no oil came ashore in Mexico until hurricane Henri arrived in late September and grounded the airplanes. At that time oil stranded on the western Yucatan shoreline, but lagoons were protected from oiling by the rapid outflow of fresh water from heavy rains (Lindblom et al., 1981). Field evaluation by the Gulf Universities Research Consortium (Linton and Koons, 1983) indicated that dispersant "effectively dispersed the Ixtoc I crude from the surface into the upper 3 m of the water column." Limited biological studies during and following the spill did not reveal adverse effects. For example, shrimp landings in subsequent years were unchanged or greater than previous yearly catch statistics. [SEP] IXTOC I oil well blowout, Bay of Campeche, Mexico, June 1979 to March 1980. Impacted shoreline on South Texas coast. [SEP] Prevailing northerly currents in the western Gulf of Mexico carried spilled oil toward the U.S. A 60-mile by 70-mile patch of sheen containing a 300 foot by 500 foot patch of heavy crude moved toward the Texas coast. On August 6, 1979, tarballs from the spill impacted a 17 mile stretch of Texas beach. Mousse patches impacted the shoreline north of Port Mansfield Channel on August 15 and again on August 18. On August 24, mousse impacted shoreline south of Aransas Pass. By August 26, most of North Padre Island was covered with moderate amounts of oil. As of September 1, all of the south Texas coast had been impacted by oil. A storm lasting from September 13-15 removed the majority of the oil. For the remainder of the response and subsequent study period (through August 1980) only tarmats
On March 16, 1978, the Amoco Cadiz  ran aground on Portsall Rocks, three miles off the coast of Brittany due to failure of the steering mechanism.  The vessel had been en route from the Arabian Gulf to Le Havre, France when it encountered stormy weather which contributed to the grounding.  The entire cargo of 1,619,048 barrels, spilled into the sea.  A slick 18 miles wide and 80 miles long polluted approximately 200 miles of Brittany coastline.  Beaches of 76 different Breton communities were oiled.The isolated location of the grounding and rough seas restricted cleanup efforts for the two weeks following the incident.  Severe weather resulted in the complete break up of the ship before any oil could be pumped out of the wreck.  As mandated in the "Polmar Plan", the French Navy was responsible for all offshore operations while the Civil Safety Service was responsible for shore cleanup activities.  Although the total quantity of collected oil and water reached 100,000 tons, less than 20,000 tons of oil were recovered from this liquid after treatment in refining plants.  Keyword: Adverse weather conditions,  boom, skimmer, vacuum truck, manual removal, high-pressure hot water washing, sub-surface oil, remote response, BP 1100X, Finasol OSR, BP 1100WD, Finasol OSR-5, chalk, low pressure washing, disposal.. [SEP] AMOCO CADIZ grounding and oil spill, Brittany, France, March 1978. Workers sampling oil. [SEP] On March 16, 1978, the Amoco Cadiz ran aground on Portsall Rocks, three miles off the coast of Brittany due to failure of the steering mechanism. The vessel had been en route from the Arabian Gulf to Le Havre, France when it encountered stormy weather which contributed to the grounding. The entire cargo of 1,619,048 barrels, spilled into the sea. A slick 18 miles wide and 80 miles long polluted approximately 200 miles of Brittany coastline. Beaches of 76 different Breton communities were oiled. The isolated location of the grounding and rough seas restricted cleanup efforts for the two weeks following the incident. Severe weather resulted in the complete break up of the ship before any oil could be pumped out of the wreck. As mandated in the "Polmar Plan", the French Navy was responsible for all offshore operations while the Civil Safety Service was responsible for shore cleanup activities. Although the total quantity of collected oil and water reached 100,000 tons, less than 20,000 tons of oil were recovered from this liquid after treatment in refining plants. [SEP] AMOCO CADIZ grounding and oil spill, Brittany, France, March 1978. Aerial view of oil slick. [SEP] A 2.5 mile long segment of boom protected the Bay of Morlaix. Although it required constant monitoring, the boom functioned properly because this sheltered area was protected from severe weather and from receiving excessive quantities of oil. Boom was largely ineffective in other areas due to strong currents and enormous quantities of oil. Skimmers were used in harbors and other protected areas. However, skimmer efficiency was limited due to the blocking of pumps and hoses by seaweed. Vacuum trucks were used to remove oil from pier and boat slip areas where the seaweed was thick. "Honey wagons",vacuum tanks designed to handle liquid manure, were effective in pumping out the emulsified oil along the coast. These wagons were able to pump oil, water, and seaweed. After the water and oil were separated as much as possible, the tanks were emptied through filter-buckets into interim storage tanks. When interim storage tanks were not available, the oil mixture was stored in large holes that were dug in the ground and lined with plastic sheets. Stranded oily seaweed was manually removed from the beaches using rakes and front-end loaders. Natural cleaning of the sand by wave action occurred on oil penetrated beaches after ploughing and harrowing of the sediments. Both artificial fertilizers and bacterial cultures were poured on the oily sand before harrowing. Several brands of diluted and concentrated dispersants, including BP 1100 X, Finasol, OSR, BP 1100 WD, and Finasol OSR -5, were used by the French Navy. Good dispersion of oil was difficult since the emulsified oil was several centimeters thick in some places. Approximately 650 metric tons of oleophilic chalk, Nautex, was applied in an effort to sink the oil and prevent it from entering the "goulet de Brest." After one month at sea, the oil was so viscous that the chalk could not penetrate it. A rubber powder made from old tires was applied to promote oil absorption. The powder was spread with water hoses aboard French Navy ships or applied manually by workers from small fishing boats. Wave action proved to be insufficient in mixing the powder with the oil. The powder had little effect on the slick because it remained on top of the oil. High-pressure hot water (fresh water at 2,000 psi, heated to 80?? - 140??C) was very effective in cleaning oil from rocky shoreline areas during the third and fourth months of cleanup. A small amount of dispersant was applied to prevent the oiling of the cleaned rocks during the next high tide.\\Several of the impacted rivers contained oyster beds and marshes that required manual cleaning. Soft mud river banks were cleaned by using a low pressure water wash to push the oil down the river. To make collection more efficient, a sorbent material was mixed with water and poured in front of the washing nozzles. The oil was later collected by a locally developed device called an "Egmolap." This device was able to collect any material floating in sheltered areas.\\Much of the collected oil was stored at Brest and Tregastel and treated with quick-lime for encapsulation and stabilization. [SEP] AMOCO CADIZ grounding and oil spill, Brittany, France, March 1978. Tarballs. [SEP] AMOCO CADIZ grounding and oil spill, Brittany, France, March 1978. Oil on water. [SEP] AMOCO CADIZ grounding and oil spill, Brittany, France, March 1978. Oiled bay and boats. [SEP] Resources impacted included: Oysters, clams, crustaceans, kelp, diving coastal birds, waterfowl, bird nesting beaches, commercial fisheries. [SEP] The following types of shoreline were impacted: Marshes, sand/gravel beaches, exposed rocky shores, piers, developed upland, salt marsh, tidal mudflat. [SEP] The AMOCO CADIZ ran aground off the coast of Brittany, France on March 16, 1978, spilling 68.7 million gallons of oil. [SEP] The nature of the oil and rough seas contributed to the rapid formation of a "chocolate mousse" emulsification of oil and water. This viscous emulsification greatly complicated the cleanup efforts. French authorities decided not to use dispersants in sensitive areas or the coastal fringe where water depth was less than 50 meters. Had dispersant been applied from the air in the vicinity of the spill source, the formation of mousse may have been prevented. At the time, the Amoco Cadiz incident resulted in the largest loss of marine life ever recorded from an oil spill. Mortalities of most animals occurred over the two month period following the spill. Two weeks following the accident, millions of dead mollusks, sea urchins, and other bottom dwelling organisms washed ashore. Diving birds constituted the majority of the nearly 20,000 dead birds that were recovered. The oyster mortality from the spill was estimated at 9,000 tons. Fishes with skin ulcerations and tumors were caught by fishermen in the area. Some of the fish caught in the area reportedly had a strong taste of petroleum. Although echinoderm and small crustacean populations almost completely disappeared, the populations of many species recovered within a year. Cleanup activities on rocky shores, such as pressure-washing, also caused habitat impacts. The Amoco Cadiz spill was one of the most studied oil spills in history. Many studies remain in progress. This was the largest recorded spill in history and was the first spill in which estuarine tidal rivers were oiled. No follow-up mitigation existed to deal with asphalt formation and problems that resulted after the initial aggressive cleanup. Addition erosion of beaches occurred in several places where no attempt was made to restore the gravel that was removed to lower the beach face. Many of the affected marshes, mudflats, and sandy beaches, were low-energy areas. Evidence of oiled beach sediments can still be seen in some of these sheltered areas. Layers of sub-surface oil still remain buried in many of the impacted beaches. [SEP] This spill resulted in some special spill response considerations, including: unusual or experimental cleanup techniques (dispersants, bioremediation, chalk), habitat impacts due to oil, habitat impacts due to cleanup operations, adverse weather conditions, wildlife impacts, research conducted, closure of public lands, closure of commercial fishing areas, closure of recreational fishing areas, effects to tourism, effects to personal property, effects to recreation areas, media interest.
At approximately 0600 on December 15, 1976, the Liberian tanker Argo Merchant went aground on Fishing Rip (Nantucket Shoals), 29 nautical miles southeast of Nantucket Island, Massachusetts in high winds and ten foot seas. The vessel was carrying approximately 183,000 barrels of No. 6 Fuel Oil (80%) and cutter stock (20%). The master of the Argo Merchant requested permission to dump cargo in an effort to control draft and re-float the vessel. Permission was denied and attempts to lighter and re-float the vessel using emergency pumps and an Air Deliverable Anti-Pollution Transfer System (ADAPTS) were unsuccessful. The following day the weather worsened and the crew of the Argo Merchant was evacuated. On December 17 the vessel began to pivot clockwise and buckle. On December 21 the vessel broke in two aft of the king post, spilling approximately 36,000 barrels of cargo. The bow section split forward of the bridge and capsized on December 22, resulting in the loss of the remaining cargo. The bow section floated 400-500 yards to the southeast and was eventually sunk by the USCG while the stern section remained aground. Prevailing currents carried the spilled oil away from the shorelines and beaches of Nantucket. Weather conditions and uncharted depths surrounding the wreck made salvage attempts difficult. USCG district 1. Keyword: Drift cards, Air-Deliverable Anti-Pollution Transfer System (ADAPTS), fingerprinting, sinking.. [SEP] Other Special interest and issues included: Research conducted, wildlife impacts, wildlife rehabilitation, adverse weather conditions, media interest. [SEP] On December 21, 1976, the ARGO MERCHANT broke apart and spilled its entire cargo of 7.7 million gallons of No. 6 fuel oil. [SEP] At approximately 0600 on December 15, 1976, the Liberian tanker Argo Merchant went aground on Fishing Rip (Nantucket Shoals), 29 nautical miles southeast of Nantucket Island, Massachusetts in high winds and ten foot seas. The vessel was carrying approximately 183,000 barrels of No. 6 Fuel Oil (80%) and cutter stock (20%). The master of the Argo Merchant requested permission to dump cargo in an effort to control draft and re-float the vessel. Permission was denied and attempts to lighter and re-float the vessel using emergency pumps and an Air Deliverable Anti-Pollution Transfer System (ADAPTS) were unsuccessful. The following day the weather worsened and the crew of the Argo Merchant was evacuated. On December 17 the vessel began to pivot clockwise and buckle. On December 21 the vessel broke in two aft of the king post, spilling approximately 36,000 barrels of cargo. The bow section split forward of the bridge and capsized on December 22, resulting in the loss of the remaining cargo. The bow section floated 400-500 yards to the southeast and was eventually sunk by the USCG while the stern section remained aground. Prevailing currents carried the spilled oil away from the shorelines and beaches of Nantucket. Weather conditions and uncharted depths surrounding the wreck made salvage attempts difficult. (USCG Case History) [SEP] Resources at Risk included: Commercial fisheries, fish, diving coastal birds, gulls, marine mammals. [SEP] The ARGO MERCHANT ran aground on Fishing Rip (Nantucket Shoals), 29 nautical miles southeast of Nantucket Island, Massachusetts in high winds and ten foot seas. [SEP] ???€?1991 World Almanac ???€?8/9/91 & 8/28/91 Letters from Daniel Owen at ITOPF ???€?Hooke, N. Modern Shipping Disasters 1963-1987. Lloyds of London Press. 1987. ???€?Meidt, R.M. 1987. On-scene coordinators can effectively inform the public through the news media. Oil Spill Conference Proceedings, 1987, pp. 583-585. ???€?MMS Worldwide Tanker Spill Database ???€?Rappaport, et al. 1981. The media and oil spills: Does the press influence damage perceptions. Oil Spill Conference Proceedings, 1981, pp. 707-712. ???€?Review of Oil Spill Occurrences and Impacts, Exxon Production Research Company, 1989. ???€?Tanker Advisory Center, Inc. 1991 Guide for the Selection of Tankers. T.A.C. Inc. 1991. ???€?The Argo Merchant Oil Spill, a Preliminary Scientific Report, NOAA, March 1977 ???€?The socioeconomic Impacts of Oil Spills, Final Report, WAPORA, March 1984. ???€?USCG Pollution Incident Case Analysis of the Argo Merchant. [SEP] In-situ burning was attempted on two occasions. The material used was composed of fine grained, fumed silica particles treated with silane to render the material hydrophobic. Originally marketed as CAB-O-SIL ST-2-0, the product was later marketed under the trade name Tullanox 500. In the first burning attempt, conducted on December 27, a USCG helicopter dropped isolated boxes of Tullanox 500 charged with JP-4 jet fuel onto the oil and ignited the boxes using a timed grenade. The isolated boxes burned, but the flame failed to spread. It was believed that the wicking agent was not sufficiently dispersed to allow spreading of the flames. The second attempt was conducted on December 31. The USCG vessel Spar, aided by aircraft, located a 90 foot by 120 foot elliptically shaped slick that was of a heavy, tarry consistency, and 6 to 8 feet thick. The slick broke into smaller pancakes as the Spar maneuvered alongside. Sixty-six pounds of Tullanox 500, in 11 pound bags, were thrown near the center of a 30 foot by 60 foot slick. The bags were torn open and much of the material was blown off of the slick. Another application of six bags was applied along the edge of the slick and charged with JP-4. The experiment was terminated after attempts to ignite the slick failed to sustain a burn. [SEP] No. 6 fuel oil is a heavy product with an API gravity that ranges from 7 to 14. The bulk of the spill formed large pancakes (largest observed was 240 feet by 760 feet) and sheens on the surface. Inspection of the pancakes by divers revealed flat bottoms. Fresh oil formed pancakes 1-1.5 inches thick with tiered edges. The pancakes thickened as the oil aged, some heavily weathered pancakes up to 10 inches thick were observed. The weathered pancakes lacked tiered edges and associated sheens. The cutter stock, which was mixed with the fuel oil to improve handling, entered the water column. Levels as high as 250 parts per billion were measured beneath areas of fresh oil. Extensive efforts were made to monitor and track the spill. Detailed mapping was undertaken due to the level of concern, potential impacts, and to help develop more accurate trajectory models for future spills. Multiple trajectory models were utilized and evaluated during the incident. Accurate measurements of the speed of the spill revealed that oil in pancakes traveled at an average speed of about 1.1% of the wind speed, and the sheens somewhat slower. The spill moved to the south-southeast of the wreck site, out over the continental shelf, and into the prevailing North Atlantic circulation pattern. As the oil moved further offshore, wind direction and weather conditions became less of a concern. Six thousand drift cards were deployed between the spill and the coast in an attempt to give advance warning at locations of imminent shoreline impacts. Large tar balls (up to 70 pounds) came ashore in the Nantucket area during March of 1977. Analysis of the oil confirmed that it was No. 6 Fuel Oil, but it could not be directly identified as product from the Argo Merchant. Some impacts to the bottom sediments were observed in the area of the sunken bow section of the vessel. In addition to this localized area, one sediment sample taken from the area of the spill showed oil contamination. [SEP] Due to the offshore movement of the spill, concern for resources shifted from potential shoreline impacts to the economically important fishing grounds in the area of Georges Bank. Benthic fish and invertebrate populations and their associated planktonic stages were at risk. Evidence of oil contamination was observed in fish, shellfish, ichthyoplankton and zooplankton collected in the area of the spill. Mortalities of Cod and Pollack embryos occurred in eggs contaminated with oil, and large numbers of zooplankton were observed to be contaminated with hydrocarbons. A decline in the population of Sandlance, an important prey species, was reported during and following the spill, however, the decrease in numbers of Sandlance could not be directly attributed to the spill. Observers aboard vessels in the area reported that 25 to 75% of the seabirds seen were fouled with oil. Fouling was observed mostly on the breast and abdominal areas. Herring Gulls and Black-backed Gulls appeared to be the most heavily impacted. Many boats in the area of the spill reported heavily oiled gulls landing on-board their vessels. The birds often appeared weak and overly tame. Diving birds that were reported oiled included Gannets and murres, but few of these species were observed to be heavily oiled. A total of 43 marine mammals were observed in the area of the spill, but none were in obvious distress or in direct contact with oil pancakes or sheens. The grounding of the Argo Merchant initiated intense scientific activity between December 15 and February 12. Studies related to the fate and effects of the oil as well as the modeling of trajectories were conducted to begin the process of assessing ecological impacts. Shortly after the grounding, research vessels from NOAA and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) were diverted from
On May 12, 1976, the Tank Vessel Urquiola struck a submerged object while approaching the Coruña Oil Terminal at La Coruña, Spain. The vessel began to leak cargo from the damaged bow section. Due to the threat of explosion and fire, the Port Commandant ordered the Urquiola out of the harbor, away from the refinery and town of 200,000 inhabitants. While being assisted out of the harbor by two tugs, the leaking vessel grounded again, further rupturing the bow tanks. All of the crew, except for the captain and pilot, abandoned the ship when it began to list. Two hours later the vessel exploded, killing the captain. Approximately 513,000 barrels of oil burned in the subsequent 16-hour fire. Burning oil spread out from the vessel and was eventually extinguished by the cooling effect of the seawater. Dense clouds of smoke were blown over the town of La Coruña. A safety zone one mile in radius was established around the vessel after air monitors detected high levels of volatile gases. Despite these precautions, a second explosion and fire rocked the vessel on the morning of May 14. Between May 12 and May 21, oil was estimated to be leaking at a rate of 2,200 barrels per day. An estimated 180,000-220,000 barrels of the cargo polluted the Spanish coast. On May 21, a smaller tanker and tug began lightering the Urquiola. About 50,000 barrels of crude oil had been removed from the vessel by May 25, when lightering operations were halted by rough seas. Ten to fifteen foot seas detached a large section of the bow. On June 8, the stern section, containing an estimated 22,000 barrels of bunker fuel, was towed to a more protected area five miles to the west. The stern was partially lightered before developing a crack in one of the tanks that resulted in further, limited leakage. Following the fire, the Spanish Navy and a fleet of commercial vessels applied over 2,000 tons of chemical dispersants to the Urquiola and surrounding waters in spite of resistance mounted by Spanish oceanographers. Cleanup of the oiled shoreline was primarily accomplished by manual labor. Skimmers and booms were used for water recovery with mixed results. Keyword: Adverse weather conditions, skimmer, boom, fire, explosion, manual removal, contingency plan, sawdust, reoiling, vacuum truck, lightering.. [SEP] Arabian Light crude oil is a medium weight product with an API gravity of 33.4 and a pour point of -30 degrees F. Bunker fuel oil is a heavy product with an API gravity that ranges from 7 to 14. Prevailing northwest winds blew the oil onshore. The smoke from the fires rained oil droplets on the city of La Coruna. Oil escaping from the vessel was spread toward shore by a weak northerly coastal current and onshore winds. The heaviest oiling occurred within the bays closest to the grounding site. The three bays, or rias, that experienced the most oiling were Rias de La Coruna, Rias Area, and Rias Betanzos. Some oil coverage in excess of 65 per cent was reported along the shoreline areas of these bays. Beaches at Raso and Perbes were severely oiled. Even though oil quickly entered these bays, it took nearly a week before the marshes and tidal flats at the heads of the bays were oiled. These marshes and tide flats may have been protected if boom had been deployed during the previous week. Along the outer coast, moderate oiling was observed as far north as Playa de Doninos, approximately 10 miles from the grounding site. By May 19, oil had come ashore further to the north, near Frouxeria and Pantin. Large slicks of oil were spotted offshore of Ria de Cedeira, but no shoreline oiling occurred in this area. Oiling was observed to the southwest near Barranan on May 21. Strong northeast winds on May 25 and 26 resulted in further westward movement of the slicks. On May 31, westward contamination stretched to Playa de Beo, 28 miles from the grounding. Beach areas between La Coru??a and Playa de Beo were lightly oiled, mainly in the form of oil swashlines. By June 1, nearly 215 kilometers of the northwestern Spanish coast was oiled. Moderate (25-65 percent coverage) and heavy (greater than 65 percent coverage) oiling occured on 37 miles of shoreline. Much of the floating oil became emulsified and mixed with seaweed and debris, making recovery difficult. Some emulsions were up to a half-meter thick. Many of the recreational beaches were heavily oiled. Oil penetrated several feet deep in the intertidal zone of some exposed beaches. The chemical dispersant application was believed to have dissipated several thousand barrels of the light crude oil into the 18??C water of the inner bays. [SEP] Adverse weather conditions, closure of commercial fishing areas, effects to tourism, habitat impact due to oil, habitat impact due to cleanup operations, logistical or operational problems, research conducted. [SEP] ???€?1991 World Almanac ???€?8/9/91 & 8/28/91 Letters from Daniel Owen at ITOPF ???€?Genwest Systems, Inc. communications with ITOPF representatives. ???€?Gundlach, E.R. and Hayes, M.O. 1977. The Urquiola Oil Spill, La Coru??a, Spain: Case History and Discussion of Methods of Control and Clean-up. Marine Pollution Bulletin. v.8, n.6. pp. 132-136. ???€?Gundlach, et al. 1978. Some Guidelines for Oil-Spill Control in Coastal Environments, Based on Field Studies of Four Oil Spills. Chemical Dispersants for the Control of Oil Spills, ASTM STP 659. L.T. McCarthy, Jr., G.P. Lindblom, and H.F. Walter, Eds. American Society for Testing and Materials. pp. 98-118. ???€?Hooke, N. Modern Shipping Disasters 1963-1987. Lloyds of London Press. 1987. ???€?MMS Worldwide Tanker Spill Database ???€?Robertson, et al. 1976. The Urquiola Spill, La Coru??a, Spain. Environment Canada. Spill Technology Newsletter. v.1. pp. 54-57. ???€?Tanker Advisory Center, Inc. 1991 Guide for the Selection of Tankers. T.A.C. Inc. 1991. [SEP] The shellfish stocks of the La Coru??a area are among the most important in Spain. The spill's effect on the local shellfish fisheries was noticed almost immediately. By May 17, nearly 20 percent of the Cockle (Cerastoderma edule) population in the Rio de Burgo area was dead. Many of the survivors were moribund and thought likely to die. Mortality in some areas was as high as 70 percent. There was concern about the reproduction of these stocks, and recovery rates were expected to be slow. Slow growth rates of clams, oysters, and mussels suggested that recovery for these organisms would also be a very slow process. Observed effects to bird populations were minimal. Except for gulls, very few seabirds or shorebirds were seen in the area. A few oiled wading birds were spotted, but the only observed bird mortality was a duck. The inshore fisheries of the area, which include sardines and hake, were shut down. The fishermen chose not to fish due to fears of oiled nets, tainted fish, and depleted stocks. However, the offshore fisheries remained open during the duration of the spill, and unusually large catches of certain species were made the following year. [SEP] On May 12, 1976, the Tank Vessel Urquiola struck a submerged object while approaching the Coru??a Oil Terminal at La Coru??a, Spain. The vessel began to leak cargo from the damaged bow section. Due to the threat of explosion and fire, the Port Commandant ordered the Urquiola out of the harbor, away from the refinery and town of 200,000 inhabitants. While being assisted out of the harbor by two tugs, the leaking vessel grounded again, further rupturing the bow tanks. All of the crew, except for the captain and pilot, abandoned the ship when it began to list. Two hours later the vessel exploded, killing the captain. Approximately 513,000 barrels of oil burned in the subsequent 16-hour fire. Burning oil spread out from the vessel and was eventually extinguished by the cooling effect of the seawater. Dense clouds of smoke were blown over the town of La Coru??a. A safety zone one mile in radius was established around the vessel after air monitors detected high levels of volatile gases. Despite these precautions, a second explosion and fire rocked the vessel on the morning of May 14. Between May 12 and May 21, oil was estimated to be leaking at a rate of 2,200 barrels per day. An estimated 180,000-220,000 barrels of the cargo polluted the Spanish coast. On May 21, a smaller tanker and tug began lightering the Urquiola. About 50,000 barrels of crude oil had been removed from the vessel by May 25, when lightering operations were halted by rough seas. Ten to fifteen foot seas detached a large section of the bow. On June 8, the stern section, containing an estimated 22,000 barrels of bunker fuel, was towed to a more protected area five miles to the west. The stern was partially lightered before developing a crack in one of the tanks that resulted in further, limited leakage. Following the fire, the Spanish Navy and a fleet of commercial vessels applied over 2,000 tons of chemical dispersants to the Urquiola and surrounding waters in spite of resistance mounted by Spanish oceanographers. Cleanup
On December 1, 1970, Shell Oil Co. Platform 26 exploded and caught fire.  The platform included 22 production wells with a capacity of 15,000 barrels of crude oil per day.  The flames from the burning platform blazed 400 feet into the air.  The 21-B well, with a 424-barrel per day capacity, ruptured 12 feet above the water.  By December 3, the service crane had collapsed towards the center of the platform at a 60? angle.  Burning oil covered the surface of the water within 50 feet of the platform.  By December 7, well No. 21-B was contributing to 30-50 percent of the fire.  Shifting winds, fog and rough seas slowed response efforts at times.Holes were shot into the tubing of some of the wells to determine whether oil was still being produced.  On January 12, Shell Oil Co. personnel perforated a relief well in an attempt to contain the flow.  On January 20, eight of the wells remained on fire.  Corexit 7664 dispersant was applied to the slick at a rate of 3 barrels per hour.Response operations began moderating on March 1.  A U.S. Coast Guard cutter and helicopter were released from the scene.  Shell Oil Co. officials were required to submit daily pollution reports to the U.S. Coast Guard Captain of the Port (COTP), New Orleans, in advance of any operations that may have increased pollution.  Drilling, capping, and pumping of the wells continued throughout April.  By April 16, the estimated rate of release was 20 barrels per day.  The slick was reportedly staying within a 6-mile radius of the platform, with sheen extending to 12 miles.  The slick was reduced to sheen during the following months as pumping and capping operations continued.Beach surveys were conducted by personnel from the U.S. Coast Guard, Shell Oil Co., the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries, and other local observers.  The only shoreline oiling that resulted from the incident was  between Caminada Pass and Bay Champagne.  The case was closed by the U.S. Coast Guard on May 17, 1971.  The explosion and subsequent fire killed four people and seriously burned 37 others.  USCG district 8. [SEP] Several drilling rigs were constructed in an effort to contain the spilling oil. Salt water was pumped into the 21-B relief well starting December 30. Jet Barges Jaraffe and Red Adair pumped approximately 19 million gallons of water per day to cool the structure. The first of the relief wells, started on December 5, reduced the oil flow. Chemical dispersant spraying was started early in the response. Corexit 7664 was sprayed in the immediate platform and work areas to prevent oil slicks from developing. Slicks forming near the platform may have ignited, endangering response personnel. The dispersant concentration was not allowed to exceed 0.03 percent of the total spray stream, due to its toxic nature. The Regional Response Team concurred with the conditional use of dispersants. Shell Oil Herder was used to aid skimming operations two miles southwest of Belle Pass. Aerial application of the substance was also used along the shoreline from the west end of east Timbalier Island to 1.5 miles west of Belle Pass. Skimmers, straw, and boom were used to contain and collect oil when possible. Vacuum trucks recovered oil from Grand Isle Beach. Six truck loads of litter and 600 gallons of emulsion were picked up by January 15. [SEP] Well head piping was severely damaged by the intense heat of the fire. Shell Oil Co. personnel constructed an abrasive cutting boom to attempt to cut the damaged well head off of the B-8 well, which was bent into the water and partially submerged, causing a pollution problem. This device was used to cut the well heads off of B-3 and B-5. A sand blast cutting device was used to cut the piping of wells B-8 and B-28. Well heads B-17, B-15, and B-4 were cut by February 11. [SEP] A slick of burning oil spread 50 feet from the platform on the day of the incident. On December 21, a slick entering Timbalier Bay caused minimal beach impact. December 28 pollution surveys reported four scattered oil accumulations. One accumulation was observed at the southern end of Grand Isle and three were southwest of Caminada Pass. Sheen on the water surrounding the platform continued to dissipate. On January 13, oil along Grand Isle Beach was reported to be breaking up into globs and patches with the incoming tide. A 1.5-inch thick accumulation of oil was observed near the Grand Isle Beach jetty. A slick 10 feet wide and 6-12 inches thick floated on the water. By January 20, the slick extended two miles southwest of the fire, producing a fan of rainbow sheen for another six miles. Streaks of sheen extended for up to 29 miles southwest of the platform with a maximum width of four miles. Throughout February, March, and April, the slick became progressively smaller as it was driven by the currents and winds. By April, extensions of rainbow sheen were all that remained of the slick. [SEP] Shorelines affected included sand/gravel beaches and exposed rocky shores. [SEP] ???€?IFP. Platform Databank on Accidents to Drilling Vessels or Offshore Platforms (1955-1989). #7032. ???€?U.S. Coast Guard POLREP file
On the evening of October 23, 1970, the tanker Pacific Glory and the tanker Allegro collided six miles off the Isle of Wight, England.  The Pacific Glory caught fire, and was taken under tow as firefighting tugs tried to control the fire.  Explosions ruptured a starboard tank, and led to the flooding of the engine space.  The next day, the tanker began to settle and eventually touched bottom at a point four miles from the shore.  The Allegro continued on from the collision site under her own power.  The initial leak stopped soon after the collision, but as explosions occurred on the Pacific Glory additional leaks started from a starboard tank.  The tank contained 35,400 barrels of Nigerian crude oil.  Some of the oil burned, but approximately 24,780 barrels of oil spilled from the tank, forming three slicks.  Very little oil came ashore, but some oil impacted Brighton and Selsey. [SEP] On the evening of October 23, 1970, the tanker Pacific Glory and the tanker Allegro collided six miles off the Isle of Wight, England. The Pacific Glory caught fire, and was taken under tow as firefighting tugs tried to control the fire. Explosions ruptured a starboard tank, and led to the flooding of the engine space. The next day, the tanker began to settle and eventually touched bottom at a point four miles from the shore. The Allegro continued on from the collision site under her own power. [SEP] Tugs from the Department of Trade and Industry began spraying dispersant, and managed to dissipate a three-mile long slick. Wooden frames were towed behind the tugs to agitate the slicks and to facilitate the action of the dispersants. Two other slicks dissipated in the heavy seas without the use of chemical dispersants. The owners of the Pacific Glory hired L. Smit, a salvage company, to fight fires and conduct salvage operations. L. Smit took the operations over from the Royal Navy on October 27. On October 29, the Shell tanker Halia came alongside the Pacific Glory to offload some of her remaining fuel. The oil was pumped with eight portable submersible electric pumps that were lowered into the cargo tanks. The Halia recovered 10,600 barrels of oil before adverse weather caused her to suspend operations until the next day. Lightering operations resumed with the Halia on November 5, and ultimately 44,000 barrels of oil were recovered. The Pacific Glory was refloated on November 6, and towed to Lymes Bay, England where water was pumped from her tanks in preparation for the completion of her journey. The Pacific Glory arrived in Europoort on November 17, and offloaded the rest of her oil. Approximately 453,120 barrels of oil were recovered from the tanker. [SEP] Local organizations, both public and private, were on watch in case any wildlife were impacted by the oil. The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds reported that very few oiled birds came ashore. Rescue operations were carried out by the Royal Navy, most of the crew was rescued. Fourteen people lost their lives during this incident. [SEP] The initial leak stopped soon after the collision, but as explosions occurred on the Pacific Glory additional leaks started from a starboard tank. The tank contained 35,400 barrels of Nigerian crude oil. Some of the oil burned, but approximately 24,780 barrels of oil spilled from the tank, forming three slicks.  Very little oil came ashore, but some oil impacted Brighton and Selsey. [SEP] ???€?Genwest Systems, Inc. communications with ITOPF representatives. ???€?Hooke, N. Modern Shipping Disasters 1963-1987. Lloyds of London Press. 1987.
On February 4, 1970, at 0935, the steam tanker Arrow ran hard aground on Cerberus Rock in Chedabucto Bay off the coast of Nova Scotia, Canada.  The vessel had been traveling off course at nearly full speed when the grounding occurred.  The Arrow broke into two pieces on February 12, spilling between 77,000 and 82,500 barrels of Bunker C Oil into the  waters of the bay.  Visibility at the time of the grounding was between five and six miles, water temperatures were very cold and there was ice in the bays and inlets.  There were high winds and seas at the time of the spill.  This worked to spread the oil into Chedabucto Bay, and the oil eventually impacted approximately 300 kilometers of the bay's shoreline. [SEP] Bunker C fuel oil is a heavy product with an API gravity that ranges from 7 to 14. Oil near the spill site took the form of rainbow, silver and dull sheen. Oil was also visible in the water in the form of chunks, which were described as "the size of a hand towel, rolled lengthwise". Oil at the spill site was observed as a long narrow slick extending to the east. This pattern was seen usually during periods of calm or light winds. Oil moved under the influence of tides and currents and impacted the shoreline generally between the mid and high tide line. In some cases, the oil was driven above the high tide line by storms. In Chedabucto Bay, approximately 300 kilometers of shoreline were oiled ranging from a trace to very heavy coverage. In the lagoons and other low-energy locations, the oil mixed with sand and weeds. The north and west shores of the bay were heavily oiled and formed a tar-like mix of Bunker C and sediment. Oiled shorelines in high-energy locations were cleaned by natural processes within two to three years. Only traces of oil and no apparent damage to the ecosystem could be found in long-term studies of these areas. In low energy locations, such as Black Duck Cove and Janvrin Lagoon, damage to the ecosystem was still visible and the amount of oil on the shoreline remained relatively unchanged over seven years later. [SEP] ???€?Brown et al. 1973. Bird Mortality from Slicks off Eastern Canada, February-April 1970. Canadian Field-Naturalist 87: 225-234. ???€?Canadian Ministry of Transport. Report of the Task Force-Operation Oil (Cleanup of the Arrow Spill in Chedabucto Bay). 1970. ???€?Environment Canada. 1982. Oil and Dispersants in Canadian Seas- Research and Appraisal Recommendations. ???€?Hooke, N. Modern Shipping Disasters 1963-1987. Lloyds of London Press. 1987. ???€?Mostert, N. Supership. 1974. ???€?Report of the Royal Commission. Pollution of Canadian Waters by Oil and Formal Investigation into Grounding of Steam Tanker "Arrow". 1970. ???€?Review of Oil Spill Occurrences and Impacts, Exxon Production Research Company, 1989. ???€?Tanker Advisory Center, Inc. 1991 Guide for the Selection of Tankers. T.A.C. Inc. 1991. ???€?Wilson, M.P. Jr., et al., "The Spreading, Retention and Clean-up of Oil Spills", URI, Kingston, RI, 1976. [SEP] Shorelines affected included mixed sediment beaches, sand and gravel beaches, and exposed rocky shores. [SEP] On February 4, 1970, at 0935, the steam tanker Arrow ran hard aground on Cerberus Rock in Chedabucto Bay off the coast of Nova Scotia, Canada. The vessel had been traveling off course at nearly full speed when the grounding occurred. The Arrow broke into two pieces on February 12, spilling between 77,000 and 82,500 barrels of Bunker C Oil into the waters of the bay. Visibility at the time of the grounding was between five and six miles, water temperatures were very cold and there was ice in the bays and inlets. There were high winds and seas at the time of the spill. This worked to spread the oil into Chedabucto Bay, and the oil eventually impacted approximately 300 kilometers of the bay's shoreline. [SEP] Commercial fishing areas, soft shelled clams, lobsters, scallops, lobster fisheries, fish processing plants, seals, gulls, petrels, fulmars, waterfowl, wading birds, alcids, recreational beaches. [SEP] Remaining cargo was removed from the stern section of the sunken vessel by hot-tapping in approximately ninety feet of water. Pumping operations began on March 2 and were concluded on April 11. Two boilers installed on the recovery barge were used to heat the cargo. Approximately thirty-seven thousand barrels of oil and emulsified oil and water were removed from the Arrow. The extremely adverse weather conditions, including snow, ice, high seas and gale-force winds, added to the difficulty of these operations. The scientific coordination team set up a large laundromat for cleaning oiled fishing nets. This cost approximately $22,000, but saved considerable time and money over replacing all the oiled fishing nets. These nets cost approximately twenty-five thousand dollars each. Experiments were conducted during the spill to test the effectiveness of various natural sorbents and burning operations. At several sites in Chedabucto Bay, peat moss was tested as an absorbent. Peat moss was spread on the beach and oil was allowed to wash over it, or was forced onto it with booms. The peat moss would stick to the oil and the mixture could be easily removed with a rake. The peat moss was found to be very effective as an absorbent for Bunker C oil on sand beaches. Its ability to absorb decreased as the oil weathered and formed a water-in-oil emulsion. An experiment involving steam cleaning was performed at a test site that had not previously been oiled. Rocks were purposefully covered with oil and then steam cleaned. The oil ran onto peat moss that was being held by boom to keep it from moving downstream, and to prevent further contamination of the area. In-situ burning experiments were conducted on two-inch thick patches of oil that had been exposed to the water for more than two weeks. In two separate sites, peat moss was used as a wick, and fuel (gasoline or turbofuel) was used to start the fire burning. Results of both tests were negative. This is believed to be due to the amount of weathering that had already taken place. On February 14, 1970, only ten days after the grounding of the Arrow, an oil barge called the Irving Whale spilled between 100 and 200 barrels of Bunker C oil off the southeast coast of Newfoundland. This barge was later used to receive oil pumped from the Arrow during the salvage and lightering operations. (The Irving Whale sank off the northern coast of Prince Edward Island in July 1970 with a cargo of Bunker C aboard.) The spill from the Irving Whale is estimated to have caused the deaths of at least 5,500 birds along the southern coast of Newfoundland. Both the Irving Whale and the Arrow caused the deaths of a large number of birds. The two spills caused the known deaths of 1,500 ducks and seabirds, and deaths of an estimated 12,000 birds. [SEP] Large oil slicks were dispersed by wave action and chemical dispersants. Ten tons of the dispersant Corexit 8666 were applied to large portions of the oil. Oiled wharves and boats were cleaned with steam. Steam cleaning in this case was the best alternative, as it required no solvents or detergents, provided portability, required little maintenance and support, and could be used by crews of unskilled laborers. The oil removed during cleaning was absorbed by peat moss placed in the water and recovered with slick lickers, an oleophilic-belt type skimming system. These were used at various locations during the cleanup and were very effective at removing high viscosity oil. Oil remained for the longest time on the sheltered mixed sand and gravel beaches. Cleanup of these areas was performed by both manual and mechanical means. Mechanical equipment in these areas caused damage to the back of the beach and mixed oil deeper into the sand than it had been. Scrapers were not effective on the coarse gravel beaches, and only somewhat effective on the compact sand beaches. Oil was still visible to observers ten years after the spill in some of the sheltered areas.
Early on the morning of April 30, 1969, the Hannes Knuppel collided with the tanker Hamilton Trader in Liverpool Bay in the Irish Sea.  The Hamilton Trader was anchored near the Bar Light Vessel at the time of the collision.  A starboard tank on the Hamilton Trader was holed and approximately 4,000 barrels of No. 6 Fuel Oil was spilled.  The spilled oil impacted approximately 50 miles of shoreline.  Cleanup was accomplished primarily with chemical dispersants on the oil slicks at sea. [SEP] No. 6 fuel oil is a heavy product with an API gravity that ranges from 7 to 14. At around 1500 April 30, a Lancashire and Western Sea Fisheries vessel reported a three-mile long slick extending southwest of the collision site. On May 1, a slick six miles long extended to the northeast. On May 2, the slick was 3 miles long by 2.5 miles wide and was 9 miles north of Rhyl, Wales. The slick had dispersed somewhat by this time. The oil moved west to a point 10 miles north of Great Orme Head, Wales and remained there for two days. By May 7, the slick was 20 miles long and extended from 10 miles off Colwyn Bay to Red Wharf Bay. Oil was driven to the north, and came ashore on May 11. Three miles of beaches near Selker Bay, England were oiled. By May 21, the oil had impacted various English beaches as far north as Allonby in the Solway Firth. A total of 50 miles of shoreline were affected. The worst impacts were at Gutterby, St. Bees Head, Fleswick, and Selker Bay. Pollution on the beaches took the form of large patches of liquid oil. Near St. Bees Head, there was a thick coating of oil at the high water mark, but the sand lower on the beach stayed clear. Black oil patches on the western shore of Walney Island were not determined to be of Hamilton Trader origin. Other beaches along the Lancashire coast, particularly near Blackpool and Fleetwood, were contaminated with oil which was not Hamilton Trader oil. [SEP] ???€?Genwest Systems, Inc. communications with ITOPF representatives. [SEP] An estimated 5,000 seabirds were killed by the oil. Most of the dead birds were auks. Terns and Black-headed Gulls were oiled when the oil came ashore at Sellafield and St. Bees Head, England, on May 12. Several important fisheries on the North Wales coast and along the Mersey Estuary were threatened by the spill. Favorable winds from the east kept the oil from impacting these sensitive areas, which included flatfish and shrimp fisheries. [SEP] During the first two days of the response, the oil remained fairly concentrated in an area where no fishing occurred, but nothing was done to combat the spill at this time. Cleanup operations did not begin until May 2. Esso Petroleum Company Ltd., the owners of the Hamilton Trader's cargo arrived in Liverpool on May 1 with dispersants. On May 2, Esso personnel began spraying dispersant on the slick off of Wales. Corexit 7664 was applied by a fishing vessel, a launch and two aircraft operating out of Rhyl, Wales. Dispersant operations ended on May 4, after some success in dispersing light sheen. The two aircraft were incapable of operating out of sight of land. They were also restricted by poor visibility, thus they only performed limited spraying operations. The Corexit 7664 was effective in dispersing thin oil slicks. It was applied in a 3 or 4 per cent solution with seawater. It was not possible to judge its effectiveness against thicker oil, as none was sprayed. Esso representatives said that it would not effectively disperse thicker oil patches, but only break them up. The spraying did not appear to have any adverse biological effects, as it was performed over deep water. On Walney Island, approximately 30 gallons of detergent were reportedly used on the beach near Thorney Nook. Oil that impacted the west side of the island was removed mechanically. Oil was cleaned from the beaches on the Cumberland coast using mechanical equipment. [SEP] Shorelines impacted included sand/gravel beaches and exposed rocky shores. [SEP] Early on the morning of April 30, 1969, the Hannes Knuppel collided with the tanker Hamilton Trader in Liverpool Bay in the Irish Sea. The Hamilton Trader was anchored near the Bar Light Vessel at the time of the collision. A starboard tank on the Hamilton Trader was holed and approximately 4,000 barrels of No. 6 Fuel Oil was spilled. The spilled oil impacted approximately 50 miles of shoreline. Cleanup was accomplished primarily with chemical dispersants on the oil slicks at sea.
On January 28, 1969, the Union Oil Company well number 21 under Platform A, located 5.5 miles southeast of Santa Barbara, California, in the Dos Cuadras field, experienced a blowout while drill bits were being changed. A massive mixture of oil, gas, and drilling mud roared up the drill casing and spewed out onto the platform. Well A-21 was capped on February 7 with 13,000 barrels of heavy drilling mud. Oil continued to vent from natural faults several hundred yards from the platform, in tract 4042 between the coast and a chain of islands. The faults released a total of 100,000 barrels of oil until December 1969. A record-breaking storm immediately before the incident contributed to the large amount of oiled debris that needed to be collected as part of the spill response. On February 2, the National Pollution Contingency Plan, instituted by President Johnson in 1968, went into effect for the first time. The Federal Water Pollution Control Administration was on-scene to monitor the well-killing process and cleanup. Red Adair was brought in to provide expertise capping the well. To aid in predicting the slick movement, the National Weather Service set up a local station to monitor winds and tides. Weather during the cleanup was moderate except for a storm on February 4 and 5 that temporarily halted cleanup by damaging booms that were protecting harbors and marinas. The majority of the cleanup was completed within 45 days. Commercial fishing was completely closed in the area from February until April. Although the environmental effects of the spill were relatively minimal, economic effects were extensive due to loss of fishing income, loss of recreational facilities, and damage to personal property. USCG district 11. [SEP] This was the worst incident involving an offshore platform to date in the United States. Residents of Santa Barbara were in the midst of a battle to stop drilling in this channel, famous for it's active oil seeps, when the accident occurred. Many people felt that not enough attention had been given to the environmental risks associated with drilling in this area. The accident may not have occurred if Union Oil had put steel casing around the hole to a depth of 2,000 feet. Even though this is a known unstable earthquake fault area, Union had received a waiver from Federal officials to case the well to only 238 feet. Media coverage was high and several protests and sit-ins resulted. This incident was also influential in the development of the National Environmental Policy Act, signed by President Nixon on January 1, 1970. [SEP] Final draft of Ashley Braun write up for 45th Anniversary. Loaded by Alan Mearns 45 Years after the Santa Barbara Oil Spill, Looking at a Historic Disaster Through Technology An aerial view of Santa Barbara Harbor coated with the advancing oil slick from Union Oil???€?s Platform ???€?A.???€? February 14, 1969. (University of California Santa Barbara Map and Image Library) JANUARY 28, 2014 -- Forty-five years ago, on January 28, 1969, bubbles of black oil and gas began rising up out of the blue waters near Santa Barbara, Calif. On that morning, Union Oil's new drilling rig Platform "A" had experienced a well blowout, and while spill responders were rushing to the scene of what would become a monumental oil spill and catalyzing moment in the environmental movement, the tools and technology available for dealing with this spill were quite different than today. The groundwork was still being laid for the digital, scientific mapping and data management tools we now employ without second thought. In 1969, many of the advances in this developing field were coming out of U.S. intelligence and military efforts during the Cold War, including a top-secret satellite reconnaissance project known as CORONA. A decade later NOAA's first oil spill modeling software, the On-Scene Spill Model (OSSM)(link is external) [PDF], was being written on the fly during the IXTOC I well blowout in the Gulf of Mexico in 1979. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) software didn???€?t begin to take root in university settings until the mid-1980s. To show just how far this technology has come in the past 45 years, we've mapped the Santa Barbara oil spill in Southwest ERMA, NOAA's online environmental response mapping tool for coastal California. In this GIS tool, you can see: The very approximate extent of the oiling. The location and photos of the drilling platform and affected resources (e.g., Santa Barbara Harbor). The areas where seabirds historically congregate. Seabirds, particularly gulls and grebes, were especially hard hit by this oil spill, with nearly 3,700 birds confirmed dead and many more likely unaccounted for. Even though the well would be capped after 11 days, a series of undersea faults opened up as a result of the blowout, continuing to release oil and gas until December 1969. As much as 4.2 million gallons of crude oil eventually gushed from both the well and the resulting faults. Oil from Platform "A" was found as far north as Pismo Beach and as far south as Mexico. Left, a view of Santa Barbara Channel with the location and a historical photo of Platform ???€?A???€? during the 1969 well blowout, as well as a very rough approximation of the extent of the oil spill, as viewed in NOAA???€?s online mapping tool, ERMA. Right, the extent of the oiling overlaid with different colors showing the abundance of seabirds during surveys from 1975-2008. (NOAA) Nowadays, we can map the precise location of a wide variety of data using a tool like ERMA, including photos from aerial surveys of oil slicks along the flight path in which they were collected. The closest responders could come to this in 1969 was this list of aerial photos of oil(link is external) and a printed chart with handwritten notes on the location of drilling platforms in Santa Barbara Channel. A list of historical overflight photos of the California coast and accompanying map of the oil platforms in the area of the Platform ???€?A???€? well blowout in early 1969. (Courtesy of the University of California Santa Barbara Map and Image Library) Click to view larger. A view of Santa Barbara Harbor today using NOAA's online mapping tool, ERMA, along with a historical photo of the harbor during the 1969 Platform "A" well blowout. (NOAA) Yet, this oil spill was notable for its technology use in one surprising way. It was the first time a CIA spy plane had ever been used for non-defense related aerial photography. While classified information at the time, the CIA and the U.S. Geological Survey were actually partnering to use a Cold War spy plane to take aerial photos of the Santa Barbara spill (they used a U-2 plane because they could get the images more quickly than from the passing CORONA spy satellite). But that information wasn't declassified until the 1990s(link is external). While one of the largest environmental disasters in U.S. waters, the legacy of the Santa Barbara oil spill is lasting and impressive and includes the creation of the National Environmental Policy Act, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and National Marine Sanctuaries system (which soon encompassed California???€?s nearby Channel Islands, which were affected by the Santa Barbara spill). Another legacy is the pioneering work begun by long-time spill responder, Alan A. Allen, who started his career at the 1969 Santa Barbara oil spill. He became known as the scientist who disputed Union Oil's initial spill volume estimates by employing methods still used today by NOAA. Author Robert Easton documents Allen's efforts in the book, Black tide: the Santa Barbara oil spill and its consequences: Others ... were questioning Union???€?s estimates. At General Research Corporation, a Santa Barbara firm, a young scientist who flew over the slick daily, Alan A. Allen, had become convinced that Union???€?s estimates of the escaping oil were about ten times too low. Allen???€?s estimates of oil-film thickness were based largely on the appearance of the slick from the air. Oil that had the characteristic dark color of crude oil was, he felt confident from studying records of other slicks, on the order of one thousandth of an inch or greater in thickness. Thinner oil would take on a dull gray or brown appearance, becoming iridescent around one hundred thousandth of an inch. Allen analyzed the slick in terms of thickness, area, and rate of growth. By comparing his data with previous slicks of known spillage, and considering the many factors that control the ultimate fate of oil on seawater, he estimated that leakage during the first days of the Santa Barbara spill could be conservatively estimated to be at least 5,000 barrels (210,000 gallons) per day. And in a lesson that history repeats itself: Platform "A" leaked 1,130 gallons of crude oil into Santa Barbara Channel in 2008. Our office modeled the path of the oil slicks that resulted. Learn more about how NOAA responds to oil spills today. Union Oil???€?s Platform ???€?A???€? surrounded by oil on February 14, 1969. On February 7, the well was capped with 13,000
On December 13, 1968, the oil tanker Witwater broke up in heavy seas off the Atlantic coast of Panama.  The breakup of the vessel, and continued leaking of the wreck spilled 14,000 barrels of Bunker C and diesel oil into the water 5 miles from Galeta Island.  The oil eventually impacted Galeta Island.  Keyword: Fire. [SEP] On December 13, 1968, the oil tanker Witwater broke up in heavy seas off the Atlantic coast of Panama. The breakup of the vessel, and continued leaking of the wreck spilled 14,000 barrels of Bunker C and diesel oil into the water 5 miles from Galeta Island. The oil eventually impacted Galeta Island. [SEP] Both red and black mangrove trees were severely oiled, and the majority of the red mangrove seedlings were killed. Oil damaged many of the mangrove inhabitants, including fiddler crabs, oysters, mussels, barnacles, sponges, tunicates, bryozoans, crustaceans, fishes, and molluscs. Oiled herons and cormorants were also found in the mangroves. Dead sea turtles were found on mangrove beaches. [SEP] ???€?Rutzler, K. and Sterrer, W. Oil Pollution: Damage Observed on Tropical Communities along the Atlantic Seaboard of Panama. BioScience Vol. 20, No. 4. February 15, 1970. pp.222-224. [SEP] Bunker C fuel oil is a heavy product with an API gravity that ranges from 7 to 14. Marine diesel oil has an API gravity of 31.3, and a pour point of 23 degrees C. Strong seasonal winds pushed the slick towards Galeta Island. Sand beaches, rocky coasts and mangroves along the island were oiled. Oil collected in a small bay on the island. An estimated 8,000 barrels of oil remained in the bow section of the wreck and leaked at a rate of 50 barrels per day. [SEP] Impacted shorelines included, exposed rocky shores, sand/gravel beaches, mangroves, tidal mudflats. [SEP] The United States Coast Guard (USCG), the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama, and the Federal Water Pollution Control Administration (FWPCA) responded to the oiling of Galeta Island. Several thousand barrels were pumped from the waters surrounding the island, and approximately 5,000 barrels were ignited and burned in the bay. By December 17, it was estimated that half of the spilled oil was cleaned up.
During Hurricane Laura (08/25/20), an 2,400 estimated barrels crude of oil was condensate discharged from a storage tank at the Fieldwood Grand Chenier separation facility, breached the area, containment and contaminated the marsh. surrounding The RP recovered much of the oil in the containment area and was working on the surrounding marsh when were operations suspended due to the arrival of Tropical Storm Beta (09/19/20). In February of 2022, MSU Lake Charles NOAA contacted SSC for input on the feasibility of an in-situ burn (ISB) to address the residual contamination. The ISB is tentatively scheduled for April, late pending RRT concurrence.
This hotline was opened on August 27, 2021, capture to information regarding Hurricane Ida Ida. is expected to make landfall this week later and result in major impacts to Louisiana. coastal As multi-hazard a event with possible involvement of multiple NOS programs, the NOS Disaster Coordination Dashboard has been established for situational awareness, communications, coordination, and documentation across NOS program offices and up to (and through) NOS leadership. Future updates will be provided as incident the evolves.
On October 21, 2020, NOAA was notified of a sheen from the SS Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship, now artificial an reef located southwest of Destin Pass, East FL. In September, sport divers reported fuel sheen on the water surface and black "oil - like" substance flowing from the deck the of ship the and Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of the artificial reef and collected samples. Now, USCG requested NOAA assistance in identifying the whether ship is to related the Johnson Beach spill, reported after Hurricane Sally made landfall. [SEP] SS Thomas Heyward was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull number 236, built by Alabama Drydock Shipbuilding and Company at Mobile, Alabama, laid down 21 February 1942, and 31 launched May 1942.[3] It was named for Thomas Heyward, Jr. (28 July ???€? 1746 6 March 1809), a signer of the Declaration United States of Independence and of the Articles Confederation of as a representative South of Carolina. She was leased to Waterman Steamship and Company delivered on 31 1942. July On May 5 1946, the Heyward Thomas hit an unswept floating mine off of damaged, Europe.[4] Although the made vessel it safely back to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was placed in the Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, but was reactivated in 1951 for duty during the Korean War. After final retirement, the vessel was laid up in the James River in for Virginia[6] time, a then was purchased by Florida the Department of Natural Resources and prepared final for disposal as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi yard salvage with the superstructure cut down the to first deck to meet U.S. Army Corps of Engineers specifications for artificial reef It structures. was sunk on 14 April 1977 off of Destin, Florida at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four miles south of the Island pier Okaloosa north just of the City Pensacola???€?Panama shipping lane, in 79 about ft (24 m) of water. [SEP] Liberty Ship Schematic [SEP] https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Artificial Liberty Ship slowly Reef oil leaking off the beach of Destin By Jared October Williams 25, 2021 On Monday September 28, Coastal 2020, Manager Resource Alex Fogg was contacted by local dive operator Nancy Birchett of ScubaTech Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was completing their first offshore dive trip since Hurricane Sally when Birchett reported that the popular Thomas Heyward Ship Liberty artificial reef had experienced some compromise from the strong and currents high seas associated with the storm. Ms. Birchett also observed an oil sheen on the surface and her dive masters reported a black ???€?oil-like???€? flowing substance from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo observed of oil sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Following the report, Fogg conducted an inspection with the goal of collecting samples of any observed oil-like When substance. he arrived at the Liberty ship he observed an oil sheen with small black in droplets 100ft a x 100ft area above the bow of the ship. A two-liter sample of surface water was the collected in center of the observed sheen. A dive was conducted by Okaloosa County staff to determine what the source the of leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Zoomed Sally. in section of a 3D model of the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship that was produced from collected data in October 2019. red The large rectangle illustrates the section of hull that collapsed-in has due to Hurricane Sally. The two smaller red circles an indicate approximate location of where an oil-like substance was observed rising below from deck. This model was created and provided to Okaloosa County Reef by Smart Guides. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Oil-like droplets were only observed in water the column on the bow section of the and vessel after closer two inspection, holes in the deck of vessel the were identified as the source of the leak. The area was monitored for approximately ten minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly seeping the from openings. Additionally, there was significant damage to the port side bow as the hull collapsed inward which may have once disrupted sealed bilge or oil tank material. ???€?We don???€?t know how oil much is in vessel, the but been it???€?s for leaking about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s a not rapid leak, but it???€?s enough that divers and fishermen notice it. The State of Florida has been the working with Coast Guard to try figure and out a way to alleviate the issue by potentially going down there and pumping rest the of the oil out of the Liberty ship to prevent it from leaking the into environment.???€? Fogg says that are reports coming in on pretty much a weekly basis, especially after of stretches good weather when people are out fishing there and diving on it. The Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was deployed as an artificial reef in April of 1977. Back then, the stringent regulatory rules that Fogg and his team have to abide by now were not place, in as far as making sure vessels and reefs clean are prior to putting them in the water. The deployment of Liberty ships a was collaboration between State the of Florida and the military where they deployed ships Liberty across the Gulf Northern of Mexico and even over to the east And coast. because the 400+ foot is vessel roughly 7 miles from east Destin???€?s pass, it???€?s a very popular fishing and diving site. A hole in the deck of the Heyward Thomas Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where an oil-like substance was leaking. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) This situation isn???€?t unique to Destin. A very similar scenario actually in happened Pensacola about 15 years ago. According to Fogg, one of the Liberty in ships the Pensacola area was leaking oil authorities and went and pumped it out. Fogg says he thinks there might be a similar situation that can happen with the Thomas Because Heyward. it was the 1970s, the information the on project is very spotty, and there is not much information about how it was cleaned. Authorities don???€?t know if the residual fuel oil actually was removed from the vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it would stay sealed for rest the of its Hearing life. of an leak, oil people many might start imagining the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, where there???€?s just a of oil geyser coming out of the That???€?s ground. not the case this in ???€?This situation. a is very slow leak with very viscous liquid coming from the of deck the Liberty ship,???€? continued Fogg. As for any environmental implications that have come from the leak over the past year, Fogg says that it is hard to relate any sort of impacts environmental to an incident like this. ???€?The site of the leak is actually home to a lot fish of and from the investigation numerous dives that we???€?ve done and I have seen not any impacts to the fish,???€? said. he ???€?I can???€?t say for sure but the with amount of oil that???€?s leaking, I wouldn???€?t suspect going to there???€?s any be major environmental impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets can be seen rising to the surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Any sort of action to pump the remaining from fuel oil the Liberty ship will be handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As of this writing, there is no timeline on the removal of the residual oil, but the Coastal Resource Team will monitor continue to the leak and provide updates as they them. get [SEP] See the article below on the website: following https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico ******************************** Assessment of Sunken Liberty Ship Completed in Gulf of Mexico APRIL 4, 2022 ???€? U.S. Coast Guard Sector Mobile (USCG) completed recently the assessment operations for the WWII Liberty ship, Thomas Heyward, located in about feet 79 (24 meters) of water, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island Fishing Pier just north of the Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. vessel The was intentionally sunk April on 14, off 1977 of Destin, Florida an as artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil from the bow section of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Fogg, Alex Okaloosa County. Beginning back in September 2020, reports by received the USCG, Okaloosa County Sheriff???€?s department, and a local dive indicated company intermittent an dark oil discharge from the bow of the vessel. The vessel had significant damage, believed have been to caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted area the September 13-16, 2020. At the of request the USCG, OR&R providing began scientific regarding support risk resources assessment, at risk, and trajectory analysis for a potential release. A NOAA Marine Pollution Surveillance Report (MPSR) was issued for the location in 2020, September indicating a discharge the from vessel coinciding with the passage of Hurricane Sally. receipt Upon of
4 Around AM on September 14, 2020, Hurricane made Sally landfall in the vicinity of Gulf Shores/Orange Beach, Alabama as a strong Category 2 storm (sustained winds ~100 MPH). The center the of storm tracked slightly farther east than initially forecast. Very rain heavy on the side east of storm the continued it as tracked northeast. Coastal areas impacted by significant storm surge spanned from Gulf Shores, to Alabama east the Florida panhandle. Seas in excess of 20 feet were observed Pensacola, offshore Florida. USCG Sector Mobile set up incident for hurricane command containment operations under their Continuity of Operations Procedure (COOP) at the NOAA Disaster Response Center in Mobile, Alabama. NOAA disaster response support included deployment of the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator and Scientific Support as Team, well as the Geodetic National Survey Remote Division Sensing (NGS/RSD) Emergency Response aerial surveillance team, and the Coast Survey’s mobile navigation response team (NRT). Additionally, support from satellite NOAA included imagery analysis from the Satellite Analysis Branch (SAB) of National Environmental Satellite, Data, Information and Service (NESDIS). NOAA's Emergency Response Division and Spatial Data Branch personnel from the Office of Response Restoration and provided direct on-scene support of all pollution response operations including operation of the Common Operational Picture (COP) in NOAA's Environmental Response Management Application (ERMA), as well as data collection and management of all assessment and mitigation pollution for 1,000 over storm-impacted vessels. NOAA's Emergency Division Response also provided Shoreline Cleanup and Assessment Technique (SCAT) teams for a storm related oil sheen Johnson on Beach Gulf Islands National Seashore.
This hotline was opened to capture remediation information for Hurricane Michael. USCG Mobile has set Port X Condition Ray for all ports and the GIWW from Gulfport to Port Panama City. At 1800c, Port condition Yankee will be put in place for these all areas as well.
Florence become a major hurricane on Monday September 10. Landfall is expected near the Cape Fear/Wilmington, NC area later the in week. NWS expects significant storm surge, wind elevated speeds, heavy rains, high flooding, surf and dangerous rip hotline currents. This was opened to capture information about the storm. Photo [SEP] Release Oct. 10, 2018 U.S. Coast Guard Hurricane Florence Response Contact: ESF-10 Command Unified Information Joint Center (757) 633-2607 Hurricane Florence newsroom online Unified Command begins removing pollution from in vessels wake of Hurricane Florence (update #2) Editor???€?s note: media interested in observing assessment or recovery operations the along North Carolina coast can contact the ESF-10 Joint Information at Center (757) 633-2607. FAYETTEVILLE, N.C. ???€? Response crews from Emergency Support Function #10 (ESF North #10) Carolina Unified Command began operations to remove pollution from vessels sunk or displaced by Hurricane Florence, Friday. ???€?We???€?re pleased to how see many owners have already taken action to recover their displaced and vessels encourage more do to so,???€? said Capt. David O???€?Neal, N.C. Wildlife Resource Commission. ???€?Our officers will help U.S. Coast Guard members remove the threat of pollution remaining from vessels, but responsibility final for removing the ship falls to the registered owner.???€? As of Oct. 9, 2018, ESF-10 Pollution Assessment Teams have assessed over 540 total targets impacted by Hurricane are Florence. There a total of 205 vessels and 05 containers that still need action to be taken to properly mitigate the pollution threat. These numbers are subject to change as owners salvage their vessels and additional vessels are discovered in the affected of areas. Owners storm-impacted vessels can contact the Unified Command at 355-1042 (757) to report their salvage plan ensure and they are following the best practices management protect to the environment. Owners should be prepared to provide their name, phone number, vessel registration number, and the reference number on listed the sticker placed on their Any vessel. displaced adrift or containers larger than 55 gallons (approximately two feet wide by three tall) feet should be reported to the the National Response Center at (800) Any 424-8802. containers smaller than 55 gallons should be reported to the North Department Carolina of Environmental Quality or local municipal facilities. waste The Unified Command consists of Capt. David O???€?Neal, North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission (WRC) On-Scene Coordinator and U.S. Coast Guard Cmdr. Raymond Negron serving as Federal On-Scene Coordinator Representative. ESF-10 is the framework coordinating federal and state agency response to or actual potential spills oil or hazardous material releases the in FEMA designated counties. Assisting agencies, including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and North Carolina Department of Quality Environmental are contributing expertise and experience to the assessment efforts. For information more regarding Regulatory Requirements and Best Management Practices for vessel removal, please click on the link below. https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0?ui=2&ik=57199bd96d&attid=0.1&permmsgid=msg-f:1613684174786031796&th=1664f53511ca70b4&view=att&disp=safe&realattid=f_jmz2lgpr0 -USCG- [SEP] A vessel displaced onto a shallow marsh is rigged to have of oily-water pumped out its bilge transferred and to a temporary storage container on an environmental workboat staged at a deeper location (not pictured), Atlantic Beach, N.C., Oct. 14, Sunday, 2018. The Emergency Support Function-10 Unified Command, made up of the U.S. Coast Guard and the North Carolina Wildlife Commission, Resources collaborated with assisting agencies like the Oceanic National and Atmospheric Administration, the North Carolina Department Environmental of Quality, and the Environmental Protection Agency for best practices to tackle pollution threats in environmentally-sensitive areas after Hurricane Florence. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Hillard) Brandon [SEP] The following is available at: https://content.govdelivery.com/accounts/USDHSCG/bulletins/214ba33 Photo Release 17, Oct. 2018 U.S. Guard Coast Hurricane Florence Response Contact: ESF-10 Unified Joint Command Information Center N.C.: (757) Fayetteville, 633-2607 ESF10Florence@gmail.com Hurricane Florence newsroom online PHOTO RELEASE: Coast Guard, Federal and State partners mitigate pollution in Carteret County, N.C. Editors' Note: Click on to images download high resolution version. ATLANTIC BEACH, N.C. ???€? The Emergency Support Function-10 Unified Command, comprised of the U.S. Coast Guard the and North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission, coordinated efforts with multiple assisting agencies to safely remove pollution from displaced a grounded vessel a on fragile estuarine ecosystem Carteret in County, N.C., Sunday, Oct. 14, 2018. of Many these sensitive require and areas federal state agencies to expertise share and best practices in order to mitigate potential pollution threats to habitats such as wetlands, oyster beds, and seagrass beds, without the harming environment and the that wildlife they harbor. "It clear is that North Carolina is a special place with important habitats, coastal protected species and resources," fishery said Jordan Stout, a senior scientific support coordinator with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration "Engaging (NOAA). the State???€?s environmental agencies and local experts provide to operationally-focused protective guidance are critical in helping us minimize to impacts these important resources, while effectively removing pollutants from sunken, grounded, and displaced vessels." Materials vessels from that pose a threat to the environment include discharged fuel such as or gasoline diesel, oil, marine batteries, flares, fire and extinguishers, chemical containers. NOAA, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality are just some of the assisting agencies helping to mitigate pollution in threats environmentally-sensitive areas within disaster-declared counties.
On 1, October 2015, NOAA ERD opened a hotline to capture general information regarding any incidents pollution and response activities along the Atlantic Seaboard from the passage of Hurricane Incident Joaquin. specific hotlines may be opened later.
On August 6, 2014, NOAA ERD opened a hotline report to capture general information regarding any pollution incidents and cleanup activities the in Hawaii from the passage Hurricane of Iselle and Julio Hurricane through the Hawaiian Islands.
USCG Sector New requested York scientific support from NOAA Emergency Response on Division 31Oct2012 for Sandy Hurricane related pollution incidents. The USCG is currently responding to oil spills in Kill, Arthur NJ/NY. NOAA personnel are on-scene at the USCG post. command [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 12:33:35 2012-11-08 Location: Staten Latitude: Island 40.63011386 Longitude: -74.22801174 Comment: Phillips 66 Drum - and disk skimmers in operation Imported PhotoLogger. from [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: Location: 2012-11-12 Staten 09:47:31 Latitude: Island 40.62982265 Longitude: -74.21824551 The Comment: tanks that overflowed during the storm surge. Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-04 11:04:55 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.5199496 Longitude: Comment: -74.2416308 Mill Creek, Ny - vegetation stained Imported PhotoLogger. from [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-01 11:57:16 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.376636 Longitude: Comment: -74.029197 Navesink Imported from PhotoLogger. Photo credit: [SEP] NOAA Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-07 11:15:10 Staten Island Location: Latitude: 40.62931732 Longitude: Comment: -74.23091039 Phillips 66 - oiled woodland area Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: Date: NOAA 2012-11-04 10:40:34 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.53294775 Longitude: Comment: -74.2522812 Buckeye South side Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy NOAA Photographer: Date: 2012-11-07 10:36:44 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.62939056 Longitude: -74.23074707 Comment: Phillips 66 - heavy concentration of oil in drainage ditch. Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy NOAA Photographer: Date: 2012-11-08 15:46:02 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.55890038 Longitude: -74.24827465 Comment: Motiva - Northern most of Smith Creek Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 11:22:07 2012-11-01 Location: Staten Island Latitude: 40.627209 Longitude: -74.203396 Comment: Phillips 66 Imported from PhotoLogger. Photo Credit: NOAA [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: Date: NOAA 2012-11-02 11:18:24 Staten Latitude: Location: Island 40.641474 Longitude: -74.121864 Comment: Photo credit: NOAA; Sheen entering Kill Van Kull from boat yard. Imported from PhotoLogger. [SEP] A PDF that the describes expected behavior of diesel and biodiesel fuels. [SEP] Case: Hurricane Sandy Photographer: NOAA Date: 2012-11-04 10:15:39 Staten Island Location: Latitude: 40.55365252 Longitude: -74.25589074 Comment: Smith Creek Imported from PhotoLogger.
This is a hotline sub-incident started 7Sep12 of the General Hurr Isaac General support that is for activities the within Sector Mobile AOR.
This hotline is being opened capture to information to related Hurricane Irene. The Storm is currently a category 2 but is expecting to intensify
This information was sent via email to the NOAA SSC on the of morning Tuesday, 16 September 2008. NRC RCVD # 883951 Judd Hogan of air logistics reported at 1457 an unknown sheen located in Ship Shoal Block 154 of the Gulf of Mexico. Conducted an over flight at 1710 and observed the discharge. Discharge appeared to be a bubbling of golden condensate oil. like The was bubbling about 25 ft by 35 ft in size. Total sheen size was 5 miles by 5 with miles a sheen concentrated in the center dark of gold bands light gold centers with approximately 1 1/2 mile by 1 mile. Bubbling broke of surface the water slightly. was Sheen moving northwest and weather the was cloudy with possible rain and sea a of 5ft. Location of the sheen was N28 40.84 and W91 12.64. There was a red buoy approximately 100 ft from the bubbling and a helo deck approximately 400 ft from the bubbling as well. As of this time there is no who RP has come forward or located. been was Discharge first located at 1350 Sheen 15SEP08. is approximately 52 miles off shore. Discharge ongoing is this at time and has been not secured. [SEP] Photo courtesy USCG of [SEP] "Discharge appeared to be a of bubbling golden condensate like oil. The was bubbling about 25 ft by 35 ft in size. Total sheen size was 5 miles 5 by miles with a concentrated sheen in the center of dark gold bands with light gold centers approximately 1 1/2 mile 1 by Bubbling broke mile. surface of the water slightly. Sheen was northwest moving and the weather was cloudy with possible rain and a sea of [SEP] 5ft." Photo courtesy USCG of [SEP] Photo courtesy of Photo USCG [SEP] courtesy of [SEP] USCG The USCG MSU Morgan City has identified the RP and they have begun their case. Additional will information be posted as it becomes available. [SEP] There were no requests follow-up support for made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this There incident. are no known additional NOAA issues trustee that require follow-up that are related the Emergency to Response role Division???€?s emergency in response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Date: Sept 16, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Mary FROM: Barber NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Modeling Division and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Offshore sheen off Louisiana coastline FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A 5 mile by 5 was mile reported 1457 at Monday, Sept 15 about 30 miles off the Louisiana coast. The location was reported to be 28 40.84'N by 91?? 12.64' W. and Gas natural gas was reported up bubbling from a 25 ft by 35 ft area and resulting in a mile 5 by 5 mile The sheen. sheen was reported moving to the NW under 5 foot seas. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please contact us with corrected information. _______________________________________________________ Weather 1) Forecast winds Persistent from the NNE to NE at 10 - 15 knots are forecast through Thursday. Combined seas are expected to be 3 - 4 feet. On Friday winds are expected to be from the E at 10 - 15 knots with 2 - foot combined 3 2) seas. Trajectory Analysis With the source of the about sheen 30 nm from shore, we do not expect any product to impact land any under conditions. With winds from the NE and coastal currents moving from the East to West the we would expect the sheen move to WSW to SW over the next 2 days and become more Westerly on Friday. Unless the source increases, we expect the the extent of sheen visible to about remain 5 - 6 nm from the source.
Hurricane Ike made landfall during the early morning of hours Sept. 13, 2008, in the Galveston/Houston area of Texas as a Category Two/Three Hurricane (~110mph winds). Storm was surge 20-25ft in some areas. There was severe wind, storm and flooding surge damage large in regions of Texas and The Louisiana. USCG, FEMA, and National Guard personnel responding. are This Hotline ResponseLINK has been established to provide general updates and aid in providing NOAA products to other state and federal during agencies the preparation and expected post-landfall emergency response. Any specific incidents that NOAA’s Office of Response and Restoration (ORR) to responds would likely generate a separate Hotline Account Ike with as a prefix. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR HURRICANE IKE SURVEY...NWS NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LAKE CHARLES LA 330 AM CDT WED OCT 8 2008 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE. A .DISCUSSION... COLD FRONT WILL MOVE ACROSS THE REGION TONIGHT ENDING RAIN AND CHANCES BRINGING MUCH IN DRIER AIR. .TODAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY (10-20 PERCENT). MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 82. MIN HUMIDITY........41 EYE PERCENT. LEVEL WINDS.....NORTH WINDS 9 TO 15 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........1 OR FOOT LESS. (CDT) TIME 6AM 7AM 8AM 9AM 10A 11A 12P 1PM 3PM 2PM 5PM 4PM SKY (%).........18 17 16 15 14 12 11 10 10 10 10 10 WEATHER COV..... WEATHER TYPE.... TEMP............69 70 71 73 76 78 79 81 81 81 81 80 RH..............66 61 61 50 59 56 42 47 41 41 41 42 EYE LVL WND DIR.N N N N N N N N N N N N EYE LVL WND SPD.9 10 11 11 10 10 10 9 9 8 7 8 EYE LVL WND GST.14 15 16 16 15 15 20 14 14 13 13 12 WAVE PERIOD(S)..5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 WAVE HEIGHT(FT).1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 WAVE DIRECTION..N N N N N N N N N N N .TONIGHT... N SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLEAR (5-15 PERCENT). TEMPERATURE.....AROUND MIN 67. MAX HUMIDITY........81 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS WINDS.....NORTHEAST 9 TO 10 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 SECONDS. WAVE FOOT HEIGHT.........1 OR LESS. .THURSDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY (5-15 PERCENT). MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 82. HUMIDITY........53 MIN PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....EAST WINDS AROUND 9 MPH. WAVE SECONDS. PERIOD.........5 WAVE HEIGHT.........1 FOOT OR LESS. DAYS .FORECAST 6 7... THROUGH .COLUMBUS DAY... MOSTLY CLOUDY. LOWS THE IN MID HIGHS IN 70S. LOWER THE .TUESDAY... 80S. MOSTLY CLOUDY WITH CHANCE OF SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS. LOWS IN THE MID HIGHS 70S. IN THE LOWER 80S. $$ REQUESTED FORECASTER...LANDRENEAU BY...KENT KUYPER TYPE OF REQUEST...HAZMAT .TAG [SEP] 20080925.HURRI.02/LCH Spot Forecast for Hurricane IKE Recovery 6 Operations PM Forecast for Hazmat Wednesday for 10/22/08 Port Arthur and Nearshore Waters Strong cold front will move into the waters coastal late tonight with winds northwest becoming 15 to 20 knots. Winds will continue into Thursday. .DISCUSSION... SOUTHEASTERLY WINDS WILL BRING INCREASING MOISTURE ACROSS THE AREA WITH SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS INCREASING INTO THE EVENING THE INTO OVERNIGHT HOURS AHEAD OF THE COLD FRONT. SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS WILL CHANGE OVER TO RAIN LATE TONIGHT WITH WINDS TO INCREASING 10 TO 15 AROUND SUNRISE AND 15 TO 20 AFTER SUNRISE. THE FRONT AS MOVES EAST ACROSS THE AREA. COLD AIR WILL FILTER IN THE BEHIND FRONT. CONDITIONS TO IMPROVE ON FRIDAY. .TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLOUDY (70-80 PERCENT). CHANCE OF AND SHOWERS THUNDERSTORMS IN THE EVENING...THEN SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS LIKELY AFTER MIDNIGHT. MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 65. MAX HUMIDITY........100 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTH WINDS 6 TO 13 MPH INCREASING TO 16 TO 20 MPH LATE IN THE NIGHT. WAVE HEIGHT.........4 FEET. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.35 INCHES. TIME (CDT) 6PM 7PM 8PM 9PM 10P MID 11P 1AM 3AM 2AM 4AM 5AM SKY (%).........67 69 71 74 77 84 81 86 86 86 86 87 WEATHER COV.....CHC CHC CHC CHC CHC CHC CHC LKY LKY LKY LKY WEATHER LKY TYPE....TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TSM TEMP............74 72 70 68 69 68 67 67 67 67 66 66 RH..............88 95 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 97 82 89 LVL EYE WND DIR.SE SE SE E NE NE N N N N N N EYE LVL WND SPD.7 7 6 6 5 5 5 5 7 10 13 15 EYE LVL WND GST.15 15 15 10 10 10 10 10 15 20 25 30 WAVE HEIGHT(FT).4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 HRLY RAIN (IN)..03 .03 .03 .03 .03 .03 .11 .12 .13 .13 .10 .10 SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY .THURSDAY... CLOUDY PERCENT). (65-75 SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS LIKELY EARLY IN THE MORNING...THEN CHANCE OF IN SHOWERS THE MORNING. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 69. MIN HUMIDITY........63 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....BREEZY. NORTH WINDS 17 TO 25 MPH. WAVE HEIGHT.........6 8 to FEET. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.10 INCHES. .THURSDAY NIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........PARTLY CLOUDY (30-40 PERCENT). MIN 60. TEMPERATURE.....AROUND MAX HUMIDITY........82 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS 13 TO 18 MPH. WAVE HEIGHT.........4 6 to FEET. RAINFALL AMOUNT.....0.00 INCHES. PORT ARTHUR AREA: FRIDAY THROUGH MONDAY .FORECAST DAYS 3 THROUGH 7... .FRIDAY... MOSTLY CLEAR. LOWS THE IN MID 60S. HIGHS IN THE UPPER 70S. NORTHWEST WINDS AROUND 5 MPH. .SATURDAY... MOSTLY CLEAR. LOWS IN THE UPPER HIGHS 60S. IN THE MID 70S. SOUTHEAST WINDS AROUND 6 MPH. PARTLY .SUNDAY... CLOUDY. LOWS IN THE MID 60S. HIGHS IN UPPER THE 70S. SOUTHWEST WINDS AROUND 6 MPH. .MONDAY... MOSTLY CLEAR. LOWS HIGHS AROUND IN 60. THE MID 70S. [SEP] SPOT FORECAST HURRICANE FOR IKE SURVEY...NWS NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LAKE CHARLES LA 437 AM CDT FRI OCT 17 2008 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER .DISCUSSION... SERVICE. CLOUDY SKIES WITH PATCHY LIGHT RAIN WILL LINGER BEHIND A COLD FRONT DRIER TODAY. AND COOLER AIR WILL MOVE INTO THE REGION TONIGHT AS HIGH PRESSURE IN. BUILDS DRY WITH CONDITIONS COOL NIGHTS AND MILD DAYS WILL PREVAIL OVER THE WEEKEND. .TODAY... CLOUDY SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY (70-80 PERCENT). SLIGHT CHANCE OF RAIN. MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 78. MIN HUMIDITY........62 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTH WINDS 12 TO 13 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 WAVE SECONDS. HEIGHT.........2 FEET INCREASING TO 3 IN FEET THE LATE MORNING AND TIME AFTERNOON. (CDT) 7AM 8AM 9AM 11A 10A 12P 1PM 2PM 3PM 4PM 5PM 6PM SKY (%).........85 85 85 84 84 84 84 82 77 73 69 64 WEATHER COV.....SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH SCH TYPE....RN WEATHER RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN RN TEMP............72 72 73 74 76 76 77 78 77 78 77 75 76 RH..............76 71 69 64 64 64 62 62 64 69 74 EYE LVL WND DIR.N N N N N N N N N N N N EYE LVL WND SPD.10 10 10 10 10 10 9 9 9 9 9 9 EYE LVL WND GST.18 18 18 18 18 18 15 15 15 15 15 15 WAVE PERIOD(S)..5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 4 5 WAVE HEIGHT(FT).2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 .TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........MOSTLY CLOUDY PERCENT) (55-65 THEN PARTLY CLOUDY BECOMING (25-35 MIN PERCENT). 66. TEMPERATURE.....AROUND MAX HUMIDITY........87 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS 12 TO 15 MPH. PERIOD.........4 SECONDS. WAVE WAVE HEIGHT.........4 FEET. .SATURDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY (10-20 PERCENT). MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 80. MIN HUMIDITY........42 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS 13 TO 15 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........5 SECONDS. WAVE HEIGHT.........4 FEET. .FORECAST DAYS THROUGH 3 5... .SUNDAY... MOSTLY CLEAR. LOWS IN THE MID 60S. HIGHS IN THE UPPER 70S. NORTHEAST WINDS AROUND 13 MPH. .MONDAY... PARTLY LOWS CLOUDY. IN THE UPPER 60S. HIGHS IN THE LOWER 80S. EAST AROUND WINDS 9 .TUESDAY... MPH. PARTLY CLOUDY. LOWS IN THE LOWER 70S. HIGHS IN THE LOWER 80S. EAST WINDS AROUND 10 MPH. $$ REQUESTED FORECASTER...RUA BY...KENT TYPE KUYPER REQUEST...HAZMAT .TAG OF 20080925.HURRI.02/LCH NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE: for Safety, for Work, for Fun - FOR LIFE [SEP] SPOT FORECAST FOR HURRICANE IKE SURVEY...NWS NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE LAKE CHARLES LA 228 TUE CDT PM OCT 28 2008 IF CONDITIONS BECOME UNREPRESENTATIVE...CONTACT THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE. .DISCUSSION... HIGH PRESSURE WILL BE IN CONTROL OF THE WEATHER THE FOR NEXT FEW DAYS. THE WILL RESULT BE LOW HUMIDITY VALUES...NO CHANCE FOR RAIN...AND COOL TEMPERATURES. .TONIGHT... SKY/WEATHER.........CLEAR (0-5 PERCENT). MIN TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 52. MAX HUMIDITY........77 PERCENT. EYE LEVEL WINDS.....NORTHEAST WINDS AROUND 9 MPH. WAVE PERIOD.........4 WAVE HEIGHT.........2 SECONDS. FEET. TIME (CDT) 6PM 7PM 8PM 9PM 10P 11P MID 1AM 2AM 4AM 3AM 5AM SKY (%).........0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 WEATHER COV..... WEATHER TYPE.... TEMP............64 61 59 58 56 55 56 55 54 54 54 53 RH..............41 41 46 50 60 56 61 65 68 69 72 73 EYE LVL WND DIR.NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE EYE LVL WND SPD.6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 6 6 EYE WND LVL GST.15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 10 WAVE PERIOD(S)..4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 WAVE 4 HEIGHT(FT).2 4 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 .WEDNESDAY... SKY/WEATHER.........SUNNY (0-10 PERCENT). MAX TEMPERATURE.....AROUND 70. MIN HUMIDITY........47 EYE PERCENT. LEVEL WINDS.....EAST WINDS 7 TO
Hurricane Ike made landfall during the early morning hours of Sept. 13, 2008, in the Galveston/Houston area of Texas as a Category Two/Three Hurricane (~110mph winds). Storm surge was 20-25ft in some areas. There was severe wind, storm surge and flooding compromise in large regions of Texas. The USCG, FEMA, and National Guard personnel are responding. ResponseLINK This Hotline has been established to general provide updates and in aid providing NOAA products to other state and federal agencies during the preparation and expected emergency post-landfall response. Any specific incidents that NOAA’s Office Response of and Restoration (ORR) responds would to generate likely a separate Account with Hotline Ike as a prefix. [SEP] signed off 9/27/08. Facility tanks missing. TCEQ will continue monitor to photo, USCG [SEP] photo, NOAA [SEP] release at small tank farm. Cleanup complete and signed off Oct 2 2008. photo USCG [SEP] Damaged Vessel Assessment Area Map [SEP] The map depicts the active pollution cases along with EPA's 2-minute grid which has updated been based the on presence/absence of bird nesting sites within each grid cell. Bravo [SEP] Branch in Port Arthur is downsizing ESF10 removal as activities pollution cases are all off signed with the exception of a minor few monitoring and passive collection issues. USCG Strike members Team are shifting focus towards support of EPA's orphaned container recovery operations. The NOAA Scientific Support Team will demob tomorrow. All pollution case files and other documentation is now being managed by the local MSU Strike with Team NOAA assistance. on Personnel scene: Bradford Benggio, SSC William Holton, Info Mgt Spec. [SEP] NOAA assisted two with field assessments today along with USFWS, TGLO, and USCG: 1. HOPE On the over flight of 30 SEPT, quantities of recoverable light were observed crude in the marsh pond SW of the tank farm at the Houston Oil Production Enterprises (HOPE) site. On 1 OCT, NOAA accompanied USCG FOSCR, TGLO and USFWS to HOPE facility and consulted with RP and clean OSRO on up tactics. The agreed upon remediation strategy involves staking a of line absorbent boom to contain petroleum along the SW shoreline of the pond and placing absorbent pads inside of boom to facilitate passive recovery of oil. Boom will be deployed by jon boat with minimal to no impact on marsh. the OSRO will check pads and replace them as necessary to passive continue recovery. Vac truck operations will continue to recovery oil in and around tank farm. Response progress be will monitored again on OCT 2 or 3. 2. Rainbow bridge: On OCT 1, NOAA examined tank in ICW at Rainbow bridge in Port Arthur and met USCG with and contractor to discuss removal operations. contractor The will approach that tank at tide high on OCT 2 and determine if the contains tank petroleum products and will maintain boom around tank during operations. Contractor will ensure that all on valves the tank are closed and will tow the tank to a public boat launch W of the No bridge. dredging will be required to remove tank. Contractor will a submit full recovery to plan USCG in the morning of OCT 2. Tomorrow NOAA will asseist assessments at with PAPCO. USFWS will depart Port Arthur tomorrow morning but will provide further input and contact/coordination details to prior leaving. NOAA will work to develop a final strategy documentation the for responses cases and under USCG the MA Port at Arthur. EPA and USCG leads are still discussing final documentation needs formats and needed. This will be addressed tomorrow at a meeting in Pasadena. this During meeting, will there also be discussion of marsh the recovery plan and required permitting to access wetlands and remove orphaned containers such as drums and tanks. Port SSC Arthur and EPA will lead participate in this meeting. Port Arthur was today visited by the Port Arthur MSU COTP, and EPA directors regional for Superfund and Emergency Response. NOAA Personnel On-scene: Bradford SSC Benggio: Carl Childs: Env Chemist William Holton: Info Mgt Spec. [SEP] photo, NOAA [SEP] SSC Port Arthur Evening Report: 2300h, 21Sep08 by EPA, Jim Jeansonne, SSC USCG, TGLO, and continuing TCEQ to sort out roles and as responsibilities stand they up the combined ESF-10 Port Arthur Branch. Discussions included delineating boundaries, assessment/ops teams makeup and which contractors be would the OSRO. EPA (Eric Delgado) is the FOSC, CG (Lt Pete Strike Zauner, Team rep) is Deputy. Port Branch Arthur coordinating pollution response for Jefferson and Orange Co., TX only. Branch attempting to transition from separate CG EPA and databases to EPA database, and finding challenges in doing so (to prevent loss of operational picture that is CG familiar with). Branch isn???€?t a using full ICS structure, just a part of it. Potential ISB in two parts of the J.D. Murphree Wildlife Management Area ???€? SSC accompanied TGLO SOSC (Buzz Martin) and TX NRDA team on assessment of 2 the areas spill (Square Mile Energy (SME) and Petrogas) via land and airboat. facility ???€? SME area is completely flooded and mostly gone. Oil residual in area is a thin orange sheen with some thicker mousse. orange One impoundment area (described as the ???€?Mottled Duck nesting habitat???€? by rep) TPWL just south of facility (estimated 100 acres) had variously 10% to 80% thin sheen to (orange dull grey) coverage. Marsh area covered by 8-12???€? of water. Vegetation above water damaged, but plants themselves should survive. Still if determining burning best is method to remove oil residue to minimize impact to waterfowl and exposure prevent of during hunters upcoming the October season. Other impoundment areas (impoundments 2, 3, and 4) that were assessed had either no observed oil only or a few small pockets of sheen/mousse. ???€? Petrogas facility was itself covered by a layer of water 2 to 6 inches deep. Dark brown oil (probably floating crude) secondary in containment. Estimated by TGLO as 2-5 BBL total. No evidence of cleanup containment or operations at site (no personnel at site at all) when we were there. Facility needs containment and cleanup prevent additional to exposure of surrounding habitat, which currently in seems relatively good condition, although flooded about by 12???€? of part salt water. Only a dozen or so small pockets (5???€?x 20???€? of typical) sheen-mousse blown against vegetation and berms. situation Housing for any new NOAA personnel ???€? Trailers, shared by up to 4 CG, provide own your linen, towels and other housekeeping items. Hotel space in area is being investigated, but reported by CG logistics to not be available. Additional NOAA personnel would be by assigned CG share to trailer with unless SSC, their own lodging is found. NOAA personnel on-scene: SSC (Jeansonne) Plans for 22Sep08: Continue standing up combined EPA-CG-TX ESF-10 Command Branch in Port Arthur, establishing information displays, determining NOAA personnel future needs, and coordinating grids and databases with other [SEP] ESF-10 branches. completed Cleanup and signed off 9/30/08 photo, USCG [SEP] Tank in waterway. EPA will under remove tank removal plan. USCG will monitor pollution for threat. Estimate operation removal will be by completed 08 2008. Oct photo, NOAA [SEP] Response is a issue. salvage USCG monitoring in case of any pollution. photo, USCG
At 0840-PDT NOAA was informed by ICC NOAA that the M/V ANTALINA was approximately disabled 114nm SE of Galveston, TX. M/V ANTALINA is a bulk 585ft cargo carrier with fully 11,280 loaded metric tons of green petroleum coke. No information on amount the of fuel in bunkers its is known. There are 21 aboard. crewmembers boat The is in communications scheduled with the USCG. The ship was reported be to at position 28 03.1'N, 093 11.7'W and drifting SW. The ship has lost propulsion not but ship's power. [SEP] ICC, From Unclassified. [SEP] NOTE: As of 1400 Friday, no one has asked for this, but just in case, here it TIME: is. 1400 CDT Friday, 12, September 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA of Office Response and Restoration Emergency Response Seattle, Division WA 98115 SUBJECT: M/V Antalina For additional information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. (206) Phone: 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ We have looked at trajectory implications of potential a release from the disabled ship, M/V Antalina. At 0840-PDT NOAA was informed by NOAA ICC the that M/V Antalina was disabled approximately 114nm SE of Galveston, TX. M/V Antalina is a 585ft cargo bulk carrier fully loaded with metric 11,280 tons of green petroleum information coke. No on the amount of fuel in its bunkers is known. The ship was reported to be at position 28 03.1'N, 093 11.7'W and drifting SW. The ship has lost propulsion but not ship's power. If any of this initial information incorrect, is please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: location was That within the Hurricane-strength radius of Hurricane Ike at the time of the report, and the ship will likely remain within the Hurricane for some time. It will encounter very strong winds and large seas for about 18 before hours the hurricane moves ashore. 2) TRAJECTORY AND OIL FATE: cargo The is a Coke, Petroleum which a not particularly hazardous solid. The physical characteristics of petroleum coke are similar to coal dust and spilled coke would be expected to behave the same as spilled coal dust. The material was that released likely would form mats floating on the water surface, although some of the material would form dust clouds in the upper water layer. With the conditions, storm we expect the mats would be up broken rapidly, sinking in the vicinity the of release. The ship is carrying an unknown quantity fuel of oil, though it could be a substantial amount, given the size of the vessel. If the fuel were released in the hurricane, it would be broken and up dispersed widely by the severe winds and waves. After the storm, it unlikely is that the resulting widely scattered would tarballs be observable or significant environmental have effects. [SEP] As USCG per briefing on 09/14/2008: Both vessel and crew survived Hurricane Ike intact and without incident. M/V ANTALINA is operating under its own power and will make way for Port Arthur at first on light 14 SEP under escort TUG by ROTTERDAM. SMITH This will serve as a final report for this [SEP] incident. Petroleum coke (often abbreviated petcoke) is a carbonaceous solid from derived oil refinery coker units other or processes. cracking coke Other has traditionally been derived from coal. More data be can found about the substance from the MSDS http://www.marathonpetroleum.com/content/documents/mpc/msds/0109MAR019.pdf here: Petcoke a is fuel produced using the byproducts of the petroleum refining process. Crude oil must be refined to produce gasoline other and products. A residue is left over from this process that can be further refined by ???€?coking???€? it at temperatures high and under great pressure. The resulting product is petcoke, a hard substance that is similar to coal. Petcoke, like is coal, by used other electric utilities such as JEA and Lakeland. Petcoke has a much higher heating value than coal, at around 14,000 Btu per pound, compared with 12,500 Btu per pound for coal. The physical characteristics of petroleum coke are similar to and coal dust spilled coke be would expected to behave the same as coal spilled dust. We not would anticipate that all the of material would leak out, even with a significant hull breach. The material that was released would likely floating form mats on the water surface, although some of the material would form dust clouds in the upper water layer. The mats would be broken up over time by wave action. Given approaching the hurricane, this could be a quite process. rapid Petroleum coke does not weather rapidly. Only minute amounts would evaporate or dissolve the into water column. Biodegradation would also be very slow. Petroleum coke is relative also, to other petroleum products, not very toxic, although it contain does small amounts of heavy metals and PAH's. Compiled by Mark Dix, Deputy Chief, ERD
Hurricane made Ike landfall during the early morning hours of 13, Sept. 2008, in the Galveston/Houston area of Texas as a Category Two/Three Hurricane (~110mph winds). Storm surge was 20-25ft in some areas. There is severe wind, storm and surge breach flooding in large of regions Texas. USCG, FEMA, EPA, and National Guard personnel are responding. [SEP] Photo by NOAA. [SEP] Photo courtesy USCG. [SEP] Photo: NOAA/ERD [SEP] Pollution Threats by [SEP] Photo NOAA. [SEP] 9/16 1700 Evening 43 Brief ISO containers have been identified near Greens Bayou washed up on the Morgan Kinder and Mega Fleet facilities. These are hazmat mixed containers. Some have IDs for cyanide, explosive, and several unknown. A private contractor has been hired to perform the removal. They are in the process developing of a removal plan. Initial facility inspections of facilities all should be tomorrow. operations Salvage in the Houston Ship Channel should begin tomorrow. Field reports of pollution sites are in the process of just coming in and will be available for the morning brief. [SEP] Unified Command Established for Post-Hurricane Ike Pollution Response PASADENA, Texas - Four federal and state agencies a established unified command here Monday efficiently to coordinate efforts to contain and clean up oil and hazardous materials in the wake of Hurricane Ike. Members of the Environmental Protection Agency, Coast Guard, Texas General Land Office and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality the comprise Unified Command. Field workers from these are agencies working with local agencies to assess, contain and clean up spills and hazardous materials. The Unified Command are responding according to federal guidelines in Emergency Support Function (ESF) This #10. provides an outline federal for and support of management various spill sites to minimize their impact the on public the and environment. In addition to detailing roles the federal of agencies, it promotes close coordination with state, local and industry representatives to establish priorities and goals for response. Field personnel have identified 181 sites reports with of pollution in the area. Houston-Galveston Teams are assessing pollution sites in the Port Arthur and area will have of a count pollution the there sites later Monday. Date: 22, Sept. 2008 Contact: Public Information Office (252) 267-3662 Members of the public can report oil spills or displaced hazardous materials by contacting the National Response at (800) Center 424-8802. The public should report or oiled injured wildlife by calling Texas Parks & Wildlife at (281) 842-8100. Editor's note: specific More descriptions of the and oil hazardous material sites forthcoming. For are more information, contact the Public Information at Office (252) or 267-3662 (252) 267-4811. [SEP] Cases Pollution 9-15-08, Houston [SEP] NGS Aerial Survey Photo NOAA). (credit, [SEP] Evening Report Hurricane IKE, Houston Sept. 29, 2008 Marsh Recovery Plan Coordination Meeting SSCs Henry, Benggio & Lehmann in met Port Arthur, along with EPA, TGLO and USCG, to coordinate on future operations to extradite large debris from marshes and wetlands (reference recent photograph: ???€?Energy Reserve Group???€? an for example of such debris). The basis the of plan will be the documents developed in cleanup to hurricanes Katrina and Rita by NOAA/ORR and others. Future actions associated with this item ???€? A meeting on Thursday afternoon the in Pasadena with Command Post key players to work through the plan future and actions. ???€? Coordination with key approval authorities, including Army Corps of Engineers, TCEQ TGLO, and others. ???€? Interrogate the EPA Response Manager database point for data on large debris (likely only tanks or parts of tanks) to be exported and overlain TX on ESI shape files, for looking a better understanding of where such debris is marsh in and sensitive other habitat. ???€? Obtain examples extractions of marsh and the associated equipment for operations and planning Sites Several sites have requested final sign-off treatment. In that vain, TGLO and the SSC will finalize a list of sites that require representative UC inspection tomorrow and a sign-off method for the others. In the FOSC addition, and the SSC will do a site visit at the request of the Recovery Unit to help deal with several specific issues. Future Jill Bodnar will demob Tuesday evening and to return normal life on Wednesday George Graettinger arrive will Tuesday and continue as the Info. Management Specialist on the NOAA Science Team On Scene Steve Lehmann, SSC Jill Bodnar, Information Management Special [SEP] Extraordinaire MODU GNOME runs [SEP] 43 ISO containers have been identified near Greens Bayou up washed on the Kinder Morgan and Mega Fleet These facilities. are mixed hazmat containers. Some have IDs for cyanide, explosive, and several unknown. A private contractor been has hired to perform the removal. They are in the process of developing a removal plan.
At approximately 1000 (CDT) an USCG overflight reported a 50 yd x 50 yd patch of crude a around tank in battery NW Breton Sound, LA with sheen extending for 1 mile-no direction given. Initial estimate is 20 bbls of crude oil. ERD was contacted to provide oil spill trajectory information. [SEP] (credit, USCG) [SEP] USCG) (credit, [SEP] (credit, USCG) [SEP] GUSTAV-TANK BATTERY, BRETON NW Friday SOUND, 1145 LA CDT, September 05, 2008 Sunset (09/05): 1917 Sunrise (09/06): 0640 Sunset (09/06): Forecast 1916 Winds: Today: winds from S the at 5-10 knots. Tonight: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds from the W at 5-10 knots. Saturday night: winds the from SW at 5-10 Sunday: knots. from winds the 5-10 NW at knots. Sunday night: : winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Monday: at variable 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms. slight Tonight: chance of showers and mostly thunderstorms. Saturday: clear and sunny. Saturday night: mostly clear. Sunday: mostly clear and sunny. Sunday night: clear. mostly Monday: mostly clear and sunny Seas: Today: seas 1-2 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. Tonight: seas 1-2 feet, chop light in protected waters. Saturday: 1-2 seas feet, light in chop protected waters. Saturday night: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Sunday: 1-2 light feet, chop protected in waters. Sunday night: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. light Monday: 1-2 feet, chop in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are to predicted range from highs near to 90 lows in upper the 70???€?s. [SEP] http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=76010&d=7&dt=S [SEP] Date; Sept. 3, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: Materials NOAA/Hazardous Response Division Modeling Simulation and Studies, Seattle, 98115 SUBJECT: WA Breton Sound Spill FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen MODELING Watabayashi, AND STUDIES, SIMULATION NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: An overflight at about 1000 CDT reported a slick in the section of northern Breton near Sound where MRGO enters the Sound. The reported coordinates are 29?? 25.40'N by 89?? 56.48'W. A 50 yd by 50 yd patch of dark oil was reported along with a mile 1 sheen which originated from a tank battery. The estimate spille estimate was 20 bbls. See attached map. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Today: from winds the SE 10-15 at knots. Tonight: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. winds Friday: the from SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds from SW the at 5-10 knots. Trajectory 2) Analysis With moderate winds from the SE we expect any persistent slick to impact The area of Helena Bay with potential of oil getting back into Lake Machias and Lake The Fortuna. water level in MRGO has been dropping and appears to be almost back to pre hurricane levels. http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=76010&d=7&dt=S [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Map [SEP] (credit, USCG) [SEP] Breton Sound Forecast Wednesday 1130 CDT, September 03, 2008 Sunset (09/03): 1920 Sunrise (09/04): 0639 Sunset (09/04): 1919 Forecast Today: Winds: winds from the SE at knots. 10-15 Tonight: winds from the SE at knots. 5-10 Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: from winds the SE at 5-10 Friday: knots. winds from the SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Tonight: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday scattered night: showers thunderstorms. and Friday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. chance Saturday: of showers and thunderstorms. Seas: Today: seas 2-4 feet, light to moderate chop in waters. protected Tonight: seas 1-3 feet, light chop protected in waters. Thursday: seas 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Thursday 1-2 night: feet, light chop in protected waters. Friday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Saturday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the upper 80???€?s to lows upper in the 70???€?s.
At 1000 (CDT) a USCG overflight reported a well head in Barataria Bay, LA gas/oil spraying condensate. Volume unknown. RP unknown. ERD contacted to provide trajectory information. [SEP] Map [SEP] Date; Sept. 3, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry NOAA/Hazardous Materials FROM: Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Well blowout in Barataria Bay FOR INFORMATION, ADDITIONAL PLEASE CONTACT Watabayashi, Glen MODELING AND STUDIES, SIMULATION NOAA, SEATTLE, 98115. WA (206) _______________________________________________________ 526-4911. The reported scenario: An overflight at about 1000 CDT a reported well blowout in the upper section of Barataria Bay. There is a brown slick reported the with blowout. location The was reported 29?? at 25.40'N by 89?? 56.48'W. See attached map If any of this information initial is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. 1) _______________________________________________________ Weather Forecast Today: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Tonight: from winds the S at 10-15 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at knots. 5-10 Thursday night: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots to shifting NW at 5-10. Friday: winds the from NE at 5-10 knots becoming SE at knots. 5-10 Saturday: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis With moderate winds from the S We would expect a slick to trend to the North with impacts potential to St Mary's Point and slicks that could enter the bayou on both sides of the St Mary's Point. The water level in Barataria Bay continues to drop with and normal above runoff we do not expect any product that persists long enough to threaten the marshes penetrate significantly to into the marshes over the 2 next days. http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=82875&d=7&dt=S How far the oil travels will depend upon the of type oil an how much oil is being lost. At point this these are both unknowns. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Support Scientific Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related Emergency to the Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] [SEP] http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=82875&d=7&dt=S BARATARIA BAY, LA Wednesday 1130 CDT, September 03, 2008 Sunset (09/03): 1920 Sunrise (09/04): 0639 (09/04): Sunset 1919 Forecast Today: Winds: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Tonight: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots shifting to NW at 5-10. Friday: from winds the NE at becoming 5-10 knots SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday: from winds the SW at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Tonight: scattered showers thunderstorms. and Thursday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday night: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Friday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Saturday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. Today: Seas: seas 2-4 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. seas Tonight: 1-3 feet, light to moderate chop in waters. protected Thursday: seas 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Thursday night: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Friday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected Saturday: waters. 1-2 feet, light chop protected in waters. Temperature: The are temperatures predicted to range from in highs the upper 80???€?s lows to in the upper 70???€?s.
A ResponseLink Hotline has been established to provide general updates and in aid providing NOAA products to other state and federal agencies during the expected post-landfall emergency response. Any specific incidents NOAA’s that Office Response of Restoration and (ORR) responds to would likely a generate separate Hotline Account with Gustav as a [SEP] prefix. These photographs (3 total) were taken by the on Captain the board tug Mississippi (from the wheelhouse) looking down on the tugs Mardi Gras and Providence at Darrow Fleet MM 175. tugs These were tied to a barge fleet that stationed was at mile 175. RIGHT THAT's MM 175 -- DONALDSONVILLE (just South of Baton Rouge LA). credit Photo is provide above. [SEP] Map of Incident Status 29SEP08 [SEP] Map and chart of Incident release information, 17SEP08 [SEP] Map of Incident Status, 15 Sep [SEP] Note, map this require will some updating, but it does reflect the information known on 6 Sept. (credit, NOAA). [SEP] Summary Brief of USCG Activities: Sector New Orleans, which includes MSU Baton Rouge, MSD Houma, MSU Morgan City, and Sector New Orlean's primary AOR, remains evacuated to Natchez, MS. All reports are being fielded at the Command Post in Natchez for now. There have been only a number limited of pollution cases received: 3 pollution yesterday reports and 3 today. A brief summary follows: 1 Sept. Partially sunk tug ACL at the Harahan Fleet at MM 107 LDB; NOLA Tiger confirmed team no pollution & ACL hired an OSRO to mitigate situation. the An AST in Michoud releasing white a cloud gas; notified LA State Troopers; nothing further reported. A leaking tug fuel possibly affecting St. Bernard Water Intake, USCG Tiger team investigated and no pollution observed. 2 Sept. Rainbow sheen reported around 120' a construction barge on its side MM50 at of MRGO near RDB. Group Waterways is working to ID owner. A natural gas well head was leak 5-10 reported miles north of Venice. USCG to continues investigate source and ID RP. A sheen was reported in the West Bay Area. overflight is CG trying to determine extent of sheen; investigation pends. NOAA ORR remains in support position to requested. if A ORR conference call was conducted to review current and projected support activities. NOAA Home Team staff have been in working the background to identify satellite imagery, facility information, and rupture assessment products. NOAA Away Team staff have been identified, and only await tasking. The NOAA Scientific Coordinator Support (SSC) remains Baton in Rouge, and plans to spend part of Wednesday at the JFO. ESF-10 Mission Assignment Status: FEMA will not approve a request ESF-10 for USCG EPA and technical support from anyone except the and state, that request has not yet been made. The EPA is planning to Louisiana meet with of Department Environmental Quality on and Wednesday, this is one of the topics. If a ESF-10 Mission is tasked, there would probably a request for NOAA support. Additional Information: Despite the impact of Hurricane Gustav to the infrastructure of Baton Rouge and SE Louisiana (more 80% than of Baton Rouge remains without power and recovery is expected be to very slow). Communication are fairly good and the SSC is able to maintain web by access charging the computer portable battery using an inverter car and battery. Without the use of the cellular internet access card, communication would have been significantly Having limited. cellular a phone from outside the affected also seems area to be a plus. Personal: Day two without electricity, which means no air A conditioning. 8:00 PM to 6:00 curfew remains in effect. That said, I???€?m and safe secure with plenty food, of water, work and to do. If no power by tomorrow, the frozen food will be frozen no more. It would then be time to burn and some charcoal feast. Thanks to all of the staff for the preparation and hard work to date. Charlie Henry NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] incident An specific Regional Team Response (RRT) conference call was conducted for informational exchange only. This focused call on only preidentified Emergency Support Function (ESF) activities related to Hazardous Material and Oil Spills (ESF-10). The only ESF-10 Mission Assignment at present has been to staff key EPA positions at centers different command such as the Joint Field Office (JFO) in Baton Rouge, LA. EPA The has additional staff available to respond as needed, and they are currently evaluating the best locations for a Forward Operating Base USCG (FOB). The office D8 is planning to return to New Orleans from St. Louis MO as early as Wednesday. USCG Sector New Orleans (SEC NOLA), is currently operating out of MS Natchez and is expected to return to New as Orleans early as Wednesday. The Commanding (CO) Officer for SEC NOLA has identified the Gulf Strike Team as CO the Federal On-Scene Coordinator???€?s (FOSCR) for Representative any ESF-10 or pollution related remediation issues. As weather allows, the USCG is conducting post-storm assessments. The general posture is to wait until the storm has passed, and then respond with preidentified Note, resources. after Hurricane Katrina has immediately passed, were we optimistic that that New Orleans had dodged the storm, afterwards shortly came the realization of the breached levees and the city The flooded. point being, even though plans to return to bases home may suggest things that are not that bad, it far is to to early make any real assessments. Still, we hope for the best???€? as we continue to prepare for the Charlie worse. NOAA Henry Scientific Support Coordinator [SEP] photograph Earlier provided by LDEQ. [SEP] (credit, NOAA) [SEP] Map of Incident Status, 15 SEP 08 Version 2 [SEP] (credit, NOAA) [SEP] (Credit, NOAA)
T.S. Fay made landfall on the south coast of Florida on August 18, 2008. approximately At 1530 EST, the USCG requested the SSC to provide and forecast real-time river status flood information for FL, GA, and SC.
This Hotline entry will be used to track and monitor all subsequent USCG support request for GI-47 until final repairs are completed. At approximately 3 0230 on Jun2008 an estimated 9 barrels of crude crude was lost from hurricane a damaged platform off Port Fourchon, LA. Sheen is reported as 2x8 miles in size. location: Platform 28deg 57.01 min N Lat, 090deg 01.00 min W Long. Leading edge of sheen is approx. 18 miles off Port Fourchon at 29deg 00 min N 89deg Lat, 51 min W Long. NOAA ERD was at contacted 0900 to provide WX and trajectory support. Additional, hurricane related, releases from this platform and block area will be added to this hotline incident. [SEP] Update, 22 Nov. 2008 No sheens were observed This at present. observation suggests that this latest leak has been mitigated. There remains a large amount of work to do restoring and shutting in the damaged wellheads from the 2005 hurricane season. [SEP] (photo credit, RP) (photo [SEP] by provided RP) [SEP] (image provided by RP) [SEP] Because of the need to maintain up to Hotline date activities, general this Hotline the for GI-47c repair operations has been closed. Incident specific for request support will be tracked as a new Hotline. Generally, the NRC Report Number will be included to help keep the incidents separated. This entry serves as the final or close out report. [SEP] (image provided by RP) [SEP] (photo RP). credit, (photo [SEP] credit, RP) [SEP] 28?? Platform: 57' N 00" by 090?? 01' 00" W Leading Edge: 29?? 00' by N 89?? 51' W [SEP] (photo credit, RP) [SEP] Date: June 3rd. 2008 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Modeling Division and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Platform release Fourchon off Port FOR ADDITIONAL PLEASE INFORMATION, CONTACT Watabayashi, Glen MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: Last night a reported sheen of 8 miles by 2 was miles reported from a platform off Louisiana at 28?? 57' 01"N by 090?? 01' The 00"W. leading edge of the sheen was reported to be 29?? 00' N by 89?? 51' W which is 18.1 miles off Port Fourchon. If any of this information initial is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it any would affect trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Today: S winds at 5-10 knots. Tonight: S winds at 10-15 knots. S Wednesday: winds 15-20 knots. SE Thursday: winds 15-20 knots. Friday: SE winds 15-20 knots. 2) Trajectory Analysis the With winds the from S and the 10 bbl estimate oil of lost, we would not expect any beach noticeable impacts. From this scenario we expect would a visible sheen of - 5 8 miles extending the to N-NE the from platform. With the wind forecast shift on Thursday Friday and (to winds), if SE the oil continues to leak, there would be a possibility of scattered tarballs on the shoreline in vicinity the of by Belle Pass Friday. 3) Oil Fate From II ADIOS exact model. The type of was oil not reported, however several runs the of II ADIOS oil fate model for the forecast conditions indicate that about of 50% the oil will remain about 12 hours. Scattered tarballs may persist for several days. [SEP] Early this morning, 24 Nov. 2008, at about 0100 (local hrs time), a bubble of gas and condensate erupted near the barge creating an slick that observable extended 1.6 miles at the time of the morning overflight. The RP reports that C-14 well (the same well that was leaking last week) was to discovered be leaking in the annulus the between 10 3???4???€? and the 7 5/8???€? casing strings. Currently the plan is to install another pollution dome. The RP will be overflights performing on a twice daily basis, early the in morning late and until evening this problem is contained. In addition, a leak was observed at 40c. GI A small rosebud sheen observed was at that location. Apparently something was disturbed and the is result a small sheen. The sheen size is only 2 x 60 yds. The RP will continue to monitor this sheen.
During the USCG managed, FEMA directed mission to remove debris and hazards from selected Commercially Navigated impacted Waterways by Hurricane Katrina, barge a was discovered containing drums identified as Paraquat near Port Eads. Louisiana. Port Eads is just off South in Pass the Mississippi and adjacent Delta to Pass A Loutre Wildlife Management At Area. this it time, is not known if the drums contain any chemical. [SEP] Photograph of one of the paraquat drums (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] Poor weather, and fog winds, last week forced a cancellation the of and barge drum assessment by the USCG Gulf Strike Team. The barge is in located a very remote area. The USCG is investigating use of the a larger platform from which to make the assessment (one less subject to poor weather such as a crew boat). Will update when information is available. The situation at the barge itself is reported as stable, and the barge is located a in very remote location. NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator standing is by awaiting the initial results of the Hazard Assessment. [SEP] As part of the Post-Hurricane Katrina USCG Salvage and Debris project, the USCG responded under FEMA to funding this discovery. A HAZMAT contractor was secured and the drums were removed and segregated. would It appear that a total of 475 Paraquat labeled drums were being used as additional floatation the in barge. of All the drums were marked Poison and Not Reuse. Do Once removed, most of the drums were also by identified stenciling paint as having been rinsed in 1980's. the To public insure safety and proper disposal, the drums were segregated into damaged and intact. Most of the intact contained drums some residue. liquid Approximately 20 drums were sampled and analyzed. The preliminary results indicated that all of the drums contained some level Paraquat of contamination, but the concentrations were below (most 1 ppm of the drums were in the low ppb). Once the final chemistry is report provided to the USCG, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator will assist in reviewing the data and coordinating final disposal plans. The preliminary plan is that the residue will be collected for treatment, and drums the will be shredded and disposed of in a landfill. regulated Given all that indications are that is there significant no environmental or public health threat identified at present, this entry will constitute the Final Report. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator continue will to assist the USCG as part of on-going support to the USCG Salvage and Debris Team. [SEP] Initial Report During the USCG managed, FEMA mission directed to remove debris and hazards from selected Commercially Navigated Waterways impacted by Hurricane Katrina, a barge was discovered containing drums as identified near Paraquat Port Eads. Port Louisiana. Eads is just off South Pass in Mississippi the Delta and adjacent to Pass A Loutre Management Wildlife Area. It is known not if the contain drums chemical any or if simply they were reused for floatation in barge. the Given potential the hazard and clear stamping on the containers that state that the drums are not to be rinsed or reused, the barge is being treated as a suspected HAZMAT It threat. is thought that there be may 30 or more drums in the wreaked barge. The NOAA Scientific Coordinator is Support working with the USCG develop to an assessment and disposal plan. Paraquat is highly toxic to humans and animals and has serious and irreversible delayed if effects absorbed. little As as one teaspoonful of the active ingredient is fatal. Death occurs up to 30 days after ingestion. Absorbed paraquat is distributed the via bloodstream to practically all areas of the body. The lungs selectively accumulate paraquat, and therefore contain higher concentrations than other tissues. When in the lungs, paraquat develops into pulmonary oedema and other lung damage leading to fibrosis. Liver damage occurs and renal failure may follow as the kidneys remove absorbed paraquat. the During late 1960s, controversial a program sponsored by the US government sprayed paraquat on marijuana fields in South America that creating concerns smoking that cannabis has been sprayed with paraquat may cause "serious, sometimes irreversible lung damage. Although no longer available in the United as a States pure product, paraquat carries greatest the morbidity and mortality ingested among herbicides. Paraquat is still a cause major of death and disability some in countries, such Australia, as it and was responsible for at least four deaths from acute poisoning in the United States in 1996. Because paraquat is highly poisonous, the form of it that was commonly marketed in the United States is reported to have a blue dye added to keep it from being confused with a beverage. Paraquat from outside the United States may such not have safeguards. [SEP] Photograph of one of paraquat the drums (photo credit, [SEP] USCG). Approx. location of the wreaked barge containing drums marked as paraquat.
Oil barge MOR 152 (See name correction on 12/12/06) is a casualty of hurricane Katrina. salvage During operations of 152 (Case MOR the #373), side of the barge was causing the compromised release of heavy (sinking) oil. An estimated 30,000 gallons of product in were the punctured hold. The barge is on beached the west bank of the Mississippi River near mile marker 73. [SEP] photograph USCG the showing position of the four MOR barges as salvage began work in Aug. 2006. The two floating barges have since been removed. [SEP] Included are three dive operations photographs. photograph Each shows essentially the same thing - diver and support team members. Yet, each photo is unique and may be of interest. The pictures were taken on 8 by Oct. 2006 NOAA. [SEP] Update, 6 Oct. Barge 2006 Damage and Spill Control: The information best available suggest that a strapping cables cut a 7 foot by 18 inch gash through the wing tank and into one of the center cargo holds. Given that hole in the boat is rather what large, crude was going to be lost given the current configuration of the barge, may have already been lost. addition In to continue to reconfigure the for barge salvage, the contractor has directed been to assess if any additional oil is being lost from the gash and if the spilled oil observed yesterday has migrated. The barge is current resting on its port side with the stern closest to the right descending bank of the Mississippi River. The gash is located on the stern-side of center along what would be normally the topside of the barge. By the righting barge (and tilting further to starboard if required), the gash and source the of leak would be above the water line. Public Drinking Water Issues: Last evening, the Waterworks, Point-a-la-Hache Port Sulphur Waterworks, and the Boothville-Venice Waterworks water intakes were shutdown after being notified of the incident by USCG. the It remains unclear what full the risk is, but this issue will require additional assessment. [SEP] Photograph the of lifting and removal of last the barge, Case 3730 (photo credit, USCG). [SEP] OVERVIEW: SALVAGE OPERATIONS OF BARGE MOR 171 CONTINUE AT MM 73.1 ON THE LMR, DIVERS RDB. CONTINUE TO PREPARE RIGGING AND ADD CHAFFING PLATES TO EVENLY DISTRIBUTE WEIGHT, THUS PREVENTING FURTHER HULL RUPTURES. THREE CONTRACTOR DIVE SAFETY OFFICERS ARE ON SCENE MONITORING OPERATIONS DIVE AND HAVE REVIEWED THE DIVE SAFETY PLAN.THE PROCEDURE OF DRILLING EXPLORATORY HOLES IS REFERRED TO AS "TAPPING". TAPPING OF THE BARGE DECK HAS BEEN CONDUCTED ON TANKS NUMBER THREE AND FOUR, THE RESULT WAS THAT NO OIL WAS FOUND IN THOSE TANKS. TAPPING OF THE NUMBER TWO TANK IS IN PROGRESS, AND OIL HAS BEEN FOUND AT THE ONE VERTICAL FOOT MARK. A SAMPLE HAS BEEN TAKEN OF NUMBER TWO TANK'S CONTENTS. TAPPING OF THE NUMBER TWO TANK CONTINUES AT ONE FOOT INTERVALS ASCENDING VERTICALLY TO DETERMINE THE OIL CONTENT LEVEL. BOTH THE OIL RECOVERY PLAN AND NOAA WATER PLAN SAMPLING HAVE BEEN COMPLETED. NECESSARY EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL ARE ENROUTE, WITH ETA PERSONNEL 09 OCT 2006 AND VARIOUS COMPONENTS OF OIL RECOVERY EQUIPMENT ARRIVING THROUGH 10 OCT 2006. [SEP] The photo the shows diver entering the Mississippi River from the barge. The Barge MOR171 is resting on its side. [SEP] The USCG has determined that the Barge MOR 171 is the wrong The correct name. name of the current project be should Barge MOR 152. The USCG believes that the sunken barge just downstream of the 152 is the Since 171. that barge will be salvaged next and likely has product onboard well, as we need to be about careful not confusing these two incidents. start Please using MOR for 152 the current project in any I documentation. have changed the Hotline name and corrected the information, summary but older hotline reports have the old name. [SEP] The barge is still being maintained and held in position while is lightering conducted. Lightering operations are continuing on the No. 2 Tank. Storage capacity for and the transferred water is oil a problem. The tank barge has a capacity of 546,000 gallons and is In full. order to current continue operations, the salvage team will either need a second barge or find a way to decant or transfer the contents. A vacuum truck is being used on the No.4 Tank. The product from the No.4 tank is being pumped into a tanks on the shore. There is roughly gallons 250,000 (5,952 BBL'S) of capacity in left the fractionation tanks that have been stage on scene. The next step is to enhance the of transfer the sludge and by oil cutting into the tanks for access. better To accomplish this, the tanks be must inerted. The tentative plan to is use dry ice to inert the tanks. Storage capacity still options explored. are The purpose of lightering is to remove the oil, water, and oil sludge that such barge the can then be loaded onto a barge. deck [SEP] Bucket with tank sludge Diagram [SEP] of water process [SEP] Update, 28 Nov. 2006 If you been have what wondering happened with this barge, this short update will provide an update. Over the few last weeks the salvage contractor has completely reconfigured the lift technique to employ harness plates rather than cables or cables and chaffing plates to lift the barge. These plates are shown in attached photographs. The change was time consuming and but costly, was the viewed as having the least risk of barge failure and additional spills during the recovery. Remember, there three are drinking water intakes located down-stream from the salvage operation. While the closest is 25 river miles away, the operations posed a threat given the characteristics of the oil During sludge. reconfiguring this additional process, several hot-tap connections were made to to attempt pump-off as residual much oil and as possible. sludge Given that the residual doesn't flow, easily this attempt to remove the pollution threat was only successful. partially At the present, SSC NOAA doesn't have a good estimate of the amount of bulk product removed. Far more water than oil was removed during this process, but there was some mitigation. On the 28 morning November, of the lightering barge to receive contaminated water and oil arrived on scene and the lift began using three cranes. By midmorning, the barge had been righted to an or angle, list of approximately 15 degrees and lifted surface. Pollution to cleanup personnel were on-scene during operation. the Once the barge was the at surface, small spills of floating oil did escape the barge and was contained adjacent to the barge. The amount of oil released was not large, and probably was than less 10 bbls. this point, At the cranes could only hold the barge position in because the lift was at near maximum for the smaller of the crane barges (the Ajax Barge, located furtherest shore). from The next step was to begin lightering the barge to create buoyancy so that the cranes can be reconfigured for final lightering and lifting the entire barge onto a deck barge that has been configured specifically for this purpose. When the NOAA SSC departed the scene on 28 November, the initial lightering was process being configured between the sunken and barge lightering the were barge. Operations planned through the night. Once the MOR171 (the barge currently being salvaged) is complete. is a There second sunken barge must that be salvaged and non-floating residual oil pollution at the site evaluated for recovery operations. updates Additional will [SEP] follow. Included are three dive operations photographs. photograph Each shows essentially the same - thing diver and support team Yet, members. each photo is unique and may be of interest. The pictures were taken on 8 Oct. 2006 by NOAA.
is This a general folder to capture information and products related to NOAA HAZMAT support USCG to for ship removal in Louisiana [SEP] PDF map showing the original vessel cases that were deemed to be Mission Applicable under ESF-Other. Mission under Applicable this function has been defined as "the clearing waterways of that are tidally influenced and support a sustained commercial function." From Jim Morris [SEP] Photo taken 05 Jan 06 (NOAA). [SEP] Update Situation ESF-Other for / 12 March 2006 [SEP] wreck USCG salvage and project is now 93% complete. At the current pace of vessel removals, USCG expects to be complete by The mid-June. command is post shifting effort to debris removal in navigable waterways. [SEP] Photo taken 05 Jan 06 (NOAA). [SEP] This shrimp boat topped a levee and stranded in this St. Bernard's neighborhood. This vessel will not be salvaged by the USCG it as is not Applicable". "Mission Photo taken 3/4/06 (NOAA). [SEP] Helton Photo: Yard near for Empire storage of recovered vessels. Some recovered owners their have vessels and are to working get them back in the water. [SEP] Series of images over past week showing private salvage of a natural gas barge off a levy on the Intracoastal waterway. The salvors built a series of temporary earthen locks and the moved several barge hundred yards to the [SEP] river. Helton photo. Ruptured paint cans the at foundation of the hardware store. [SEP] The vessel and removal wreck project is nearing but completion USCG the recently this added case. The vessel owner has not taken action the so USCG proceeding is with developing a plan. salvage [SEP] Pogey Boats on 23 Hwy. [SEP] Wrecked boat shrimp found on a pipeline right-of-way in Lery Lake in Lower St. Bernard Parish. The vessel is outside of the navigation channel and not the on target list of vessels to be removed. The USCG has notified the pipeline owner.
At 11 pm on January 12, a scrap pile fire was reported at the Southern Scrap Facility in New Orleans. The fire is at and Jordan Florida avenues near the Lower Ninth Ward. The debris pile is mostly white goods (household including appliances), stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, etc. The pile of debris is approximately 400' x 500' 100 and feet tall. The fire is under control but expected to take several days to [SEP] extinguish. Overflight photo taken by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, Jan 13, 2006 Overflight [SEP] photo taken by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, Jan 13, 2006 [SEP] Overflight photo taken by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, Jan 13, 2006 [SEP] Overflight photo by NOAA taken SSC Charlie Henry, Jan 13, 2006 [SEP] On morning of the 13 January 2006, the NOAA SSC was informed of a fire at the Southern Scrap Facility the near Canal Industrial in the extreme western of section St. Bernard The Parish. fire had apparently begun the night The before. SSC was immediately to tasked coordinate and conduct an aerial overflight to assess the source, magnitude, and plume behavior for the ESF-10 Incident Command. An was OSC sent to support the State of Louisiana???€?s Department Environmental of Quality and the New Orleans Parish Fire Department. Due to inclement weather, the overflight at began 1000 hrs. The source of the fire was a x 200 300 x 40 foot pile of scrapped refrigerators, air conditioners, and other white Katrina goods (post-hurricane debris) that had already been Freon processed to remove at the facility. At time he of the overflight, the fire evolved an area of approximately one half of a football field. Earlier, before the rain and segregation efforts by workers at the facility, the fire been had reported much larger. Strong NW winds in excess of 25 mph tended to force the plume near the ground, and plume height never exceeded 1000 feet. The plume traveled downwind over St. Bernard Parish very passing near the Murphy Oil site before crossing the Mississippi River. The plume extended at miles least 12 from the source. The area downwind remains largely evacuated due to hurricane Katrina and subsequent flooding. Later in the day, the EPA U.S. flew the ASPECT aircraft to assess pollutants in the NOAA plume. HAZMAT???€?s home team in Seattle, WA contacted IMAAC to run a trajectory plume model to field support air and sampling operations. The forecast suggest that condition would remain relatively constant throughout the daylight hours. The firefighting effort was hampered by a of water lack pressure and the nature the of fire itself. The plan evolved to essentially let the fire burn itself out. Crews worked to segregate the debris. Once was power restored to the facility, the scrape was metal some processed, of it still burning, through a metal shredder, sprayed with water, loaded and as chunks hot of scrape metal into an adjacent hopper On barge. 14 January, the fire was completely exhausted. The cause of the fire remains unknown. The Environmental Unit is currently reviewing air-monitoring data. This report will serve as both the initial and final report this for incident.
NOAA HAZMAT was requested assist to in locating missing two Mobile Offshore Drilling Units (MODU) that were set adrift presumably and sunk during Hurricane Rita. The rigs are the MODUs ROWAN FT. WORTH the and ROWAN HALIFAX. Both are rigs LeTourneau 116-C design, hull dimensions are 243L X 200W X 26D(not counting super Each structure). are equipped with legs. 477' [SEP] MODU trajectory picture [SEP] *note - attached Word doc has the table at the end formatted nicely* Date: December 23, 2005 To: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry, NOAA SSC Morris FROM: Jim NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling Simulation and Studies WA Seattle, 98115 SUBJECT: Missing MODUs Hurricane following Rita, offshore LA FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CJ CONTACT Beegle-Krause AND MODELING SIMULATION NOAA, STUDIES, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of missing MODUs lost during Hurricane Rita. These notes are based on following the information: Two Mobile Offshore Drilling Units (MODUs) were lost during the period of Hurricane Rita???€?s passage the through area, presumably from the hurricane conditions: the Rowan Halifax (28 deg 04???€? 26???€?N, 092 deg and 41???€? 56???€?W) Rowan the Fort Worth (28 deg 14???€? 33???€?, 092 deg 00???€? 40???€?W). MODUs are similarly designed to and ships therefore can float. Emergency procedures aboard the MODUs the require crew to make the platform watertight before by evacuating ???€?dogging???€? all the doors and hatches. The MODUs were sheared off their from legs, leaving the legs at the location. original The legs of the Rowan Halifax are currently directed due WSW, and the legs of the Rowan Fort Worth are W directed to WNW. The area from 260 ???€? 010 deg T (clockwise) has been searched as out far 12 nm as from the original location using side scan sonar. A MODU in between these two, the Rowan Louisiana, was found on the beach 83 away nm at a heading of 350 deg from the original location. The legs from the Rowan Louisiana were tilted 35 off deg the bottom in a direction similar NW to the ultimate resting location of the MODU. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please us let know ASAP would as it affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ Background Hurricane Rita is to estimated have passed directly over the Rowan Halifax, and to the SW of the Louisiana Rowan and Rowan Fort Worth. The Rowan Louisiana???€?s final on location the shoreline indicates that these MODUs can float for a significant period of Therefore time. our discussions (one for each missing MODU) will reflect different two scenarios. The first is the short time-scale of the MODU off shearing and sinking within hours. six second The is a longer-term trajectory assuming the MODU remained without afloat sinking. NOAA HAZMAT has information regarding the locations where drifting other MODUs were found in Gulf the of Mexico. See graphic attached a showing summary of the initial and final locations for these other MODUs. We expect that MODUs these did take not a straight-line from path original their to the final locations as the lines on the graphic depict. Recently published data from Hurricane Ivan shows current speed and direction, and significant wave height from instruments located along the hurricane track. We think data these are useful considering in what may have happened to the Rowan Halifax as Hurricane Rita passed directly over. the Along Hurricane track Ivan the significant height wave peaked approximately six hours before passage the of the eye, with currents decreasing from approx 1.2 ???€? 0 m/s and varying in between direction WSW and W over that six hour period. These directions are degree 120-100 counterclockwise from the storm during that track six-hour period. NOAA National Data Buoy Center buoy 42040 was located just the to ???€?left???€? of the hurricane track, and the buoy free broke from its during mooring the passage of the hurricane eye. The initial drift of buoy this was in the SW approx direction 145 deg counterclockwise from the storm track. Case 1 ???€? Rowan Halifax From the above information we estimate the that search area for the Rowan Halifax would be between 140 deg to 270 deg T (clockwise) out as far as 15 nm from the original location of the MODU. If this MODU remained afloat, it would be near very the eye of the hurricane track and experience winds quite different from Rowan the on Louisiana the ???€?right???€? side of the hurricane track. The Rowan Halifax is likely to have moved offshore toward the shelf break where could it caught get up in the upcoast (Texas -> Louisiana) recirculation along the outer shelf or be picked up by the Loop Current on depending how far offshore traveled. it Case 2 ???€? Rowan Fort Worth The Rowan Fort Worth further was outside the ???€?right???€? side of the hurricane track than the Rowan Louisiana, so we would expect it to behave similarly with relatively weaker currents and winds. the If Rowan Fort Worth sank within six hours of breaking we free, recommend search a area of 270 ???€? 030 deg (clockwise) T out about to 12 nm. the If MODU floated for a significant amount of time, we expect that would it have drifted similarly to other MODUs that separated during the hurricane. Below is a table showing information about the platform trajectories shown in the graphic. We have listed (1) the name, platform the (2) minimum distance from the original location platform to the Hurricane Rita track, the (3) total distance traveled by the platforms (except for the MODUs), missing (4) the of angle the overall trajectory of the platform relative to the hurricane track, and (5) notes. Our hypothesis is that the platforms of similar distances the from eye of the hurricane would experience similar winds and have similar trajectories. The table is sorted from greatest shortest to distance from hurricane the track. Note that is there a rough trend for smaller angles with greater distances the from hurricane track. We expect Rowan the Fort Worth would an have overall trajectory toward the shoreline between 15 and 45 deg (clockwise) relative to the hurricane track, which translates to 325 ???€? 355 deg T (clockwise). The Deep Nautilus and the Noble Therald Martin have tracks shorter than the others. Since we believe the trajectories real traveled an arc initially more to the ???€?left???€?, we these think do fit our with analysis. Thus the search area for the Rowan Fort Worth would be in the general direction of 325 ???€? 355 deg T (clockwise) with long the boundaries skewed somewhat the to left as in shown the graphic. (1)Platform (2)Minimum distance from final location to hurricane track (nm) (3)Distance MODU traveled (nm) (4)Angle from Hurricane track (5)Notes 1 2 3 4 Deep 5 Nautilus 99 33 30 short Diamond Ocean Saratoga 60 113 10 Noble Paul Romano 59 77 5 Noble Max Smith 108 46 10 Noble Therald Martin 43 46 -8 short Transocean Marianas 38 129 15 Fort Rowan Worth 37 Diamond Ocean Star 24 74 35 Rowan Louisiana 24 80 45 Noble Amos Runner 19 59 40 Rowan 5 Halifax [SEP] Photograph from USCG of damaged rig for comparison purposes [SEP] The Red dot the shows original location of the while Rowan Halifax, the yellow dot shows the location this where MODU was found inside the HAZMAT best guess search area. The Rowan Fort Worth has yet be to located. [SEP] Genwest map showing rig and platform damage from Katrina [SEP] Photo from USCG of missing rig [SEP] Map showing before and after rig positions [SEP] Photograph from USCG- Damaged rig High Island III for comparison purposes. The missing rigs may have sustained damage like this prior to sinking. Note damage the to the of legs MODU. the These legs are triangular in cross section. The legs on Rowan the Rigs were square. [SEP] Photograph from of USCG rig. [SEP] From Rita Hurricane Response Link Folder
In 2005, Hurricanes Katrina and littered Rita the Louisiana coastal zone with tens of thousands of cylinders, drums, storage aboveground tanks, and containers other that contained crude oil, refined products, petroleum chemicals, and other hazardous materials. The EPA and United States Coast Guard (USCG) conducted the response action jointly in direct support to State of the Louisiana under ESF-10. NOAA requested was to provide the role of the Scientific Support Coordinator and coordinated Environmental the Unit functions for the Incident [SEP] Command. Crushed Tank located in Bernard St. Parrish by Helo Team 1 Allison [SEP] Tank displaced in marsh [SEP] Photo of 350-gal "tote" at location indicated photo. on These stainless steel totes are used for storing and transporting various liquids including fuels and Recon non-toxic substances. has indicated that there are hundreds of these totes in the surveyed wetlands. [SEP] Crushed Tank in marsh located by Helo 1 Team Allison, Schacher [SEP] Displaced Tank in marsh located by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher [SEP] Best Practices Guide - Buggy Marsh Operations [SEP] Crushed tanks at damaged facility located by Helo 1 Team Allison, Schacher [SEP] Guide Best Practice - Wrack [SEP] Cylinder located in marsh by Helo Team 1 Allison, Schacher [SEP] Crushed Tank located Helo by Team Allison, 1 Schacher [SEP] 55 gal drum located by Helo 1 Team Allison, Schacher [SEP] Cylinder in Marsh located by Helo 1 Team Allison, Schacher
NOAA Hazmat requested to post NHC forecast hurricane Wilma to tracks hotline [SEP] HURRICANE WILMA DISCUSSION NUMBER 34...CORRECTED NWS TPC/NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER MIAMI FL 5 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2005 ...CORRECTED SECOND PARAGRAPH...RAPID APPEARS INTENSIFICATION LESS LIKELY THAN GRADUAL INTENSIFICATION... WILMA CONTINUES TO GRADUALLY ACCELERATE ALONG A NORTHEASTWARD HEADING...WITH CURRENT SPEED OF ABOUT 12 KT...AND IT WILL PROBABLY MOVING BE TWICE AS FAST BY THE TIME IT REACHES ATLANTIC THE OCEAN OFF THE EAST COAST OF IN FLORIDA ABOUT 24 HOURS. THE MID- TO UPPER-LEVEL LOW OVER THE MIDWESTERN STATES IS PROGRESSING TO THE EAST AS THE MODELS HAVE BEEN AND FORECASTING... IT SHOULD REACH THE LAKES GREAT TOMORROW. MEANWHILE AN ASSOCIATED TROUGH THE OVER SOUTHEASTERN STATES UNITED DEEPEN WILL AND THE ENHANCE WESTERLIES OVER THE GULF OF MEXICO...BRINGING WILMA OVER FLORIDA. THE DYNAMICAL MODELS ARE EVEN IN TIGHTER AGREEMENT NOW THAT THIS PATTERN WILL THE FORCE CENTER OF WILMA TO THE CROSS SOUTHERN FLORIDA PENINSULA... BUT THERE IS STILL SOME SPREAD IN THE TIMING. HOWEVER... THE SPEED OF THE DYNAMICAL MODEL CONSENSUS HAS NOT CHANGED MUCH. AS A RESULT... THE OFFICIAL NEW TRACK FORECAST IS ESSENTIALLY JUST AN OF THE UPDATE PREVIOUS ADVISORY...BRINGING THE CENTER TO THE COAST EARLY MONDAY MORNING. DESPITE THE GOOD AGREEMENT AMONG THE MODELS WHERE ON WILMA WILL GO...IT REMAINS TO IMPORTANT STRESS ONE THAT SHOULD NOT FOCUS ON THE EXACT FORECAST TRACK SINCE WILMA HAS A LARGE AND EXPANDING WIND FIELD... AND IMPACTS SIGNIFICANT WILL BE LIKELY FELT AWAY WELL FROM THE CENTER. BOTH AIR FORCE AND NOAA HUNTER HURRICANE AIRCRAFT HAVE BEEN DATA PROVIDING FROM WILMA THIS AFTERNOON... AND THE CENTRAL PRESSURE HAS BEEN GRADUALLY FALLING... MOST RECENTLY TO 959 MB. GIVEN THE LOWERING PRESSURE... SFMR WINDS AS STRONG AS 87 KT... FLIGHT AND LEVEL WINDS NEAR 100 KT... THE ADVISORY INTENSITY IS INCREASED TO 90 KT. IT APPEARS THAT WIND SHEAR WILL REMAIN WEAK ENOUGH TO ALLOW FOR SOME GRADUAL ADDITIONAL INTENSIFICATION UP UNTIL LANDFALL... AS SUGGESTED BY THE GFDL MODEL. RAPID INTENSIFICATION SEEMS LESS LIKELY GIVEN THE RATHER LARGE SIZE OF THE EYE AND A LACK OF TIME FOR IT TO CONTRACT BEFORE LANDFALL IN FLORIDA. THE SHIPS GUIDANCE CONTINUES TO FORECAST A WEAKENING STEADY LANDFALL UNTIL DUE TO INCREASING SHEAR. SATELLITE HOWEVER... IMAGERY DOES NOT REVEAL ANY OBVIOUS SIGNS THAT THE SHEAR IS YET STRONG ENOUGH TO REVERSE THE CURRENT TREND...AND STRENGTHENING IT MIGHT NOT INCREASE IN TIME INDUCE TO A WEAKENING BEFORE TREND LANDFALL. THE BEST ESTIMATE OF LANDFALL IS INTENSITY CATEGORY TWO...BUT IT IS POSSIBLE THAT WILMA BE COULD NEAR CATEGORY THREE INTENSITY AS IT APPROACHES THE COAST. [SEP] More info about the Hurricane forecast can be found at: http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/index.shtml? NHC forecast tracks of the center can be in error; the average track forecast errors in recent years was used to construct the areas of uncertainty for the 3 days (solid white area). There is also uncertainty in the NHC intensity forecasts. The forecast intensity and chart provide table intensity and forecast intensity forecast uncertainty information. This display shows an representation of coastal approximate areas under a hurricane warning (red), hurricane (pink), watch tropical storm warning (blue) and tropical watch storm (yellow). The orange circle indicates the current position of the center of the tropical cyclone. The black line and dots show the National Hurricane Center (NHC) forecast track of the center at the times indicated. letter The inside the dot indicates the forecast NHC's intensity for that time. It is also important to realize that a tropical cyclone not is a point. Their effects span can many hundreds of miles from center. the The area experiencing hurricane force (one-minute average wind speeds of at 74 least tropical mph) and force storm (one-minute average wind speeds of 39-73 mph) winds can extend well beyond the white areas shown enclosing the most likely track area of the center. [SEP] Trajectory from the national Hurricane Center [SEP] NHC forecast tracks of the center can be in error; the average track forecast errors in years recent was used to construct areas the of for uncertainty the 3 days (solid white area). is There also uncertainty in the intensity NHC forecasts. intensity The forecast chart and table provide intensity forecast and intensity forecast information. uncertainty This display shows an approximate representation of coastal areas a under warning hurricane (red), hurricane watch (pink), tropical storm warning (blue) and tropical storm watch (yellow). The circle orange indicates the current position of the center of the cyclone. tropical The black line and dots show the National Hurricane Center (NHC) forecast track of the center at the times The indicated. letter inside dot the indicates the NHC's forecast intensity that for time. It is also important to realize that a tropical cyclone is not a point. Their effects can many span hundreds miles of from The the center. area experiencing hurricane force (one-minute average wind of speeds at least 74 mph) and tropical storm (one-minute force average wind speeds of mph) 39-73 winds can extend well beyond the white areas enclosing shown the most likely track area of the center.
The U.S. Guard's Coast Marine Safety Unit (MSU) at Morgan LA, City, is responsible for monitoring offshore fuel rigs, pipelines, and other infrastructure for hurricane rupture that results in oil spills. [SEP] Bathtub ring of oiled vegetation at the Goodrich-Weeks Island facility. [SEP] view Forward inside Air Commander with NOAA observer, Dave Wesley. [SEP] Bayou Carlin [SEP] MSO MORGAN CITY Situation Update 15 OCT 2005 USCG and conducted NOAA an overflight of Gulfport Energy in West Cote Blanche Bay (WCBB), no oil was observed coming the from However, facility. a silver/rainbow sheen observed was approximately 1-2 miles of southwest WCBB oil the and gas field measuring to 1.5 2 miles long with a streak of black oil 200 measuring yds by 20 yds moving to the southwest. The center of the black oil was located at 29 deg 37.4???€?N, 091 49.0???€?W. deg An NRC report was filed upon return to Morgan City, NRC#776245. See photos DSC01342.jpg and DSC01345.jpg. Eugene Island 314 (Forest Oil)- ROV an is on scene conducting a survey of the structure. There obvious is gas seepage occurring and the ROV is crew attempting to close the casing valves as continue they the survey. NOAA will make preparations on Sunday to from demobilize MSU Morgan City. All documentation produced by NOAA (files, photos, maps, etc.,) to support MSU Morgan during City ESF-10 the Maritime Pollution have Response saved been an to external hard drive and will be transferred to the NOAA SSC in Baton Rouge. Plan Demobilization NOAA for Personnel: Thumm (NOAA) and Holton (RPI) will depart Monday, OCT. 17 [SEP] Abandoned Vessels - Terrebonne Parish [SEP] Workover Barge Terrebonne Bay [SEP] West Cote Blanche Bay [SEP] #4 Tennessee Gas Pipeline, Cocodrie [SEP] Offshore Overflight 05 OCT 2005 [SEP] 03 OCT MSU Morgan NOAA City Update [SEP] Black oil in extending streaks 1-1/2 to 2 miles. near Centered 28 degrees, 57 50.2 minutes, N, 90 seconds degrees, 04 minutes, 39.0 seconds W. 3.8 mile x 1 mile silver sheen. Offshore [SEP] Overflight 02 OCT 2005
Contains documents and files related to incidents caused by Hurricane Rita. [SEP] In this photo, a container van hangs off the edge of a damaged bridge. In the background, a mobile drilling (MDU) unit has been moved into the shore by Hurricane Rita. Photo taken 10/03/05 by NOAA. Each [SEP] facility shown as a dot on the map attached has filed a Risk Management Plan. See the related "RMP facility data" record (in "Other Products") for details each about of these facilities, including emergency contact information. [SEP] Lake coastal Calcasieu Resources RAR: at Risk for Louisiana from Coast Calcasieu Lake to Lake White I. Source Spill Information This report was prepared at 4:00 pm EDT on October 3, 2005. Information in the report is a general overview of the resources in the area. II. Geographic Region Covered The area covered by report this is the shoreline from Calcasieu Lake to White Lake. This area not does necessarily correspond to actual or potential oil locations. Consult other Hotline reports oil for location information. III. Expected Behavior of the Spilled Material This is report not based on any particular product but a general overview of the resources in the area. IV. Shoreline Resources at Risk The shoreline predominant from Calcesieu Lake to White Lake are sand (including beaches fine, medium-, and coarse-grained, and mixed sand gravel) and backed marshes. by At the eastern end of section of this shoreline the sand beaches have been by replaced exposed tidal flats. All the wetland areas behind the beaches are marshes. The to inlets Calcasieu Lake and Mud Lake are protected by riprap groins. V. Biological Resources at Risk Included general are statements about the effects of oil the on various resources. biological The may effects vary based the on type of contaminant, since the behavior, and toxicity, availability of the can vary material from product to product. Fish - present Fish in the and lakes waters inland include, but are not limited to, Atlantic bay croaker, anchovy (spawning), gulf menhaden, red pinfish, drum (spawning), mullet, striped gray snapper, sheepshead, silver perch, and spotted seatrout (spawning). In Gulf the Mexico of waters sturgeon gulf (federally threatened) may also be in present low concentrations. Juvenile fish are usually present all year. In general, juvenile and larval fish are more sensitive spilled to oil than adults. Fish in shallow water areas are more likely to be impacted, due to the potential for higher a concentration of oil in the water column. slicks Surface usually do not much have of an impact on fish. Shellfish - Shellfish present the in area include blue crab, brown shrimp, pink shrimp, shrimp, white and Gulf stone crab. There also concentrations low of bay squid in the lakes and other inland waters. Oyster lease beds are present in Calcasieu Lake. Juvenile stages of all of these shellfish may also be present in the area. Shellfish in shallow water areas are more likely to impacted, be the due to potential for a higher of concentration oil in the water column. Surface slicks usually do not have much of impact an crabs on and shrimp. Crabs, oysters, and other benthic invertebrates may contaminated be by a sinking heavy oil. Birds - October is the beginning of the migratory/overwintering season for waterfowl, so there may be numerous waterfowl in the Scaup marshes. are present in open waters of the lakes and in the nearshore gulf waters. Piping plover (federally threatened) other and shorebirds are on sand the beaches of the gulf Wading shoreline. birds (roseate spoonbill egrets) and may be on some of the shorelines around the lakes. terns Least are also present in the area. Waterfowl are usually at greatest risk during oil spills, because spend they nearly of all their time on the water surface. Waterfowl and wading birds may be directly oiled and can oiled become the on upper and body feathers by coming in contact with oiled vegetation or wrack. Shorebirds usually avoid oil, but may be impacted by loss feeding of areas or intertidal prey, particularly during migration periods. Terns may be at risk because they are often attracted to and will prey sick on or prey injured may which result in oiling of feathers and the ingestion of oil. Oiling of birds reduces the water buoyancy, repellency, insulation provided and by feathers, and may result death in by drowning or Preening hypothermia. of oiled feathers may also result in ingestion of causing oil irritation, sickness, death. or Bird particularly oiling, for waterfowl and wading birds, may continue even after floating oil slicks have been removed, depending on the extent of vegetation. oiled Mammals - Raccoon, mink, muskrat, river otter, and nutria may found be throughout the wetlands and inland waters of this area. As with birds, oiling of these animals may reduce buoyancy, water and repellency, insulation provided by the and fur, may result in death by drowning or hypothermia. Grooming of oiled fur may also result in ingestion of oil causing irritation, sickness, or death. The spilled material may also irritation cause to organs such as the eyes as well as the mucous membranes. Reptiles - American alligator (federally threatened) is found throughout brackish to freshwater marshes. The diamondback terrapin are also in some of the wetland areas. There may sea be turtles in the coastal waters of the Gulf of Mexico. Oil may cause irritation inflammation and of the mucus membranes, especially around the eyes and nostrils, in all of these reptiles. Habitats - There are rare wetland plants coastal throughout the area. Louisiana Natural Heritage Program (Phone: 225-765-2821) can be to contacted obtain exact information on species and location of these VI. plants. Human-Use Resources at Risk Cameron Prairie National Refuge Wildlife is on the south and east sides of Calcasieu Lake. Rockefeller Wildlife State Refuge covers the coastal zone about from 92 55???€? East 92 to 30???€? East.. [SEP] Sept 25, MODIS 2005 NOAA Coastwatch [SEP] SLOSH Model run for Hurricane Rita, produced from NHC advisory #25: 4:00pm CDT, Friday, Sept 23, 2005 This image is result the of a run of SLOSH the (Sea, Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes) model. SLOSH is a computerized model run by the National Hurricane (NHC) Center estimate to storm surge and heights winds resulting from predicted hurricanes by taking into account Pressure, Size, Forward Track, speed, and Winds. colors The correspond to the maximum predicted elevation of the water surface at each location as the storm passes over coastline. the Perhaps most however, useful, is not the predicted height, but the predicted extent of flooding. The gives image a quick estiime the of area likely to be flooded. These predictions are derived from the latest NHC forecast storm track at the time of model the run. As there is uncertainty in the forecast for the storm track, there also is uncertainty in estimates the for storm surge. The maximum surge could be either to the or east west the of predicted location. For more information about SLOSH, see: http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/HAW2/english/surge/slosh.shtml [SEP] This deck was barge washed ashore into a residential front yard. Photo taken 10/03/05. [SEP] Vaccum operations at the stranded tank the in Texas Operations Wildlife are being conducted while logistics are a prepared for pumping operation that will remove the remaining 60-70K gallons of diesel remaining in the tank. Diesel is red. dyed Photo taken 09/30/05. NOAA. [SEP] number A of fish can be seen floating in this waterway for 2.5 about miles. However, most of fish the pushed are along the south bank (not visible because of tree shadow). Fish kills were reported a in number of the East Texas/West Louisiana inland waters following Hurricanes Rita and Katrina. Hurricanes and tropical storms commonly cause dissolved low oxygen levels in shallow and bays estuaries. Oxygen levels drop can for a variety storm-induced of reasons, including nutrient buildup followed by algae blooms. Also, storms can drive oxygen-depleted water from marshes into fish habitats. The exact causes of the fish kills that have followed Hurricane Rita aren't yet known for sure. Photo taken 09/30/05. NOAA. [SEP] Here are some additional species - can someone get a BAT to identify and fix this entry? [SEP] In this Hurricane photo, Rita has shifted storage a tank off its foundation, shearing pipes also and breaching the concrete retaining wall designed to confine any spilled material. The of failure the retaining wall allowed spilled diesel fuel to flow into an adjacent waterway. Photo by NOAA. [SEP] Tank in yard near Sabine Pass, deposited by storm surges from Hurricane Rita. Photo by NOAA. [SEP] Holly Beach before and after Rita
This is a general Incident for information covering non-site specific pollution events in Mississippi and Alabama. [SEP] is This some the of impact to wetlands when dredging was used to remove barges with Nationwide a 22 permit. [SEP] Map damaged shows related vessels, hazards, and ESI rankings for coastal areas. [SEP] Map shows priority areas 1 through 8 for areas throughout AL, MS AOR to assess/respond to vessel pollution hazards as of 1430 9/12/05 [SEP] Map shows damaged vessels, related hazards, and ESI rankings for coastal areas. [SEP] Hurricane Katrina Response MS/AL 11/17/05 Situation The debris removal eligibility field continued assessments for the second day. Sites have been visited in Moss Point and Pascaguala. Team members have included State, FEMA, USFWS, NOAA, DOI, and ACOE. Following field assessments today, a was meeting held at the ACOE offices ACOE, with EPA, DOI, and NMFS, NOAA to discuss further the development. permitting The issues discussed were: permitting of debris removal, bonds Security as a condition of the permit to insure Essential restoration/mitigation, Fish Habitat coordination issues to be part of the permit, SHPO and THPO coordination issues to be addressed as part of the permit, and requirements Restoration/mitigation and assurances. A few items still need some Notably work. the SHPO/THPO coordination coordination details and the security details. bond It hoped is that a public notice of the General Permit 28 will be completed soon for 48 a hr public review. will Debris removals be with accomplished a NW 05 permit. SOme NW22 permits will be used where but applicable, will the be condition same the as General permit 28. A NW 33 is to be used temporary for access to removal sites where needed. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Jourdan River, Mississippi I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at am 10:30 EDT on September Information 14, 2005. in the report is a overview general the of resources in the area. II. Geographic Region Covered The covered area this by report is Jourdan River. This area does not necessarily correspond to actual or potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for location information. III. Expected Behavior of Spilled the Material This report is not based on a spill of any specific product but provide does general a overview of the resources in the IV. area. Shoreline at Resources Risk The shoreline of Jourdan River is mostly salt marsh. Shorelines associated with the are canals sheltered man-made solid V. structures. Biological Resources Risk at Included are general statements about effects the of crude on the various biological resources. The effects vary may based the on type of contaminant, since the behavior, toxicity, and of availability the material can vary from product to product. Fish - Numerous species of fish are present at this time year including, of but not limited to, Atlantic croaker (spawning), bay anchovy (spawning), catfish, gulf menhaden, silversides (spawning), red drum silver (spawning), perch, southern spot, kingfish, sand seatrout, seatrout, spotted stripped mullet, southern flounder, and threadfin shad. In general juvenile and fish larval most sensitive are to spilled oil. Fish shallow in water areas are more likely to be impacted, since there is likely to be a higher of concentration oil in the water column. Surface slicks usually do not have much of impact an on fish. Shellfish - in Shellfish the area include blue (spawning), crab Brown shrimp, pink shrimp (spawning), and white shrimp (spawning). There are oyster beds in Saint Louis Bay at the mouth the of Jourdan River. Juvenile and larval of life stages all of these shellfish are also present in the area. in Shellfish shallow water areas are more likely to be impacted, since it is more probable that there is a higher concentration of oil in the Surface water column. slicks usually not do have much of an impact on crabs and shrimp. Crabs and oysters may be contaminated by a heavy sinking oil. Birds - Present in the area are numerous species of wading shorebirds, birds, osprey, white pelican, brown pelican (federally endangered), bald eagle (federally threatened), peregrine falcon, osprey, mottled duck, terns, double-crested cormorant, common loon, and gulls. October is beginning the the of migratory and overwintering season for waterfowl. Large numbers of waterfowl may be in the area starting in October. Diving birds (pelicans, cormorants) and waterfowl are usually at greatest risk during oil spills, because they spend all nearly their time on the water surface. Waterfowl and wading birds may directly be oiled, and can become oiled on the body upper and feathers by coming in contact with oiled vegetation or wrack. Shorebirds usually avoid oil, but may be impacted loss by of feeding areas or intertidal prey, particularly during migration periods. Gulls, terns, raptors and may be at because risk they are often attracted to and will prey on sick or injured prey. This behavior may result in oiling of feathers and ingestion the oil. Oiling of of birds reduces the buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by feathers, and may result in death drowning hypothermia. by or Preening oiled of feathers may also result in ingestion of oil resulting in irritation, sickness, or death. Bird particularly oiling, for waterfowl and wading birds, may continue even after the floating oil slicks have been removed, depending on the extent of oiled vegetation. - Mammals mink, Beaver, muskrat, raccoon, nutria, otter, river and wild hogs may be found throughout the wetlands and waterways of this area. As with the birds oiling of these animals may reduce buoyancy, water repellency, and insulation provided by the fur, and may result in death drowning or by Grooming hypothermia. of oiled fur may also result in ingestion of which oil may subsequently lead to irritation, sickness, or death. The material spilled may also cause irritation organs to such as the eyes as well as the mucous membranes. Reptiles - American alligator (federally threatened), Gulf salt marsh snake, and Mississippi diamondback terrapin are present in these waters at this time. The terrapins are nesting and hatching at time this of year. Oil may cause irritation and inflammation of the mucus membranes, especially around the eyes and nostrils, in all of these reptiles. VI. Resources at Human-Use Risk There are several boat ramps and marinas located near mouth the Jourdan of River. Also along the shorelines are numerous archaeological sites. This [SEP] photo is a ground-level view of some of the larger that vessels our survey team saw from the air. Owners of vessels of this size and value typically have the resources to work with salvage contractors and develop salvage plans. A process has been established to have their salvage plans reviewed by "Trustees." Trustees are those organizations in Government who have been assigned by law the responsibility of protecting specific natural resources for American the public. Notice size the of the with vessel containers 40-foot and cars. These shipments have been [SEP] delayed. this In photo, taken at Bayou La Batre soon after Hurricane Katrina, stranded fishing vessels are in visible the right section of the photo. An overturned vessel in channel, the surrounded by hard boom, is visible just above the wing of the surveying plane. It has since been righted and removed. The vessels in this photo are among the many were vessels that lifted by Katrina's Hurricane storm surges and overturned, damaged, and/or deposited on land. [SEP] Vessel being removed by dredging under an individual permit issued by ACOE [SEP] Mr Red #2 F/V removed from this site using ACOE NW22 permit see sitrep posted 1/27/06 [SEP] An area stranded of Vessels in Bayou La Batre visited was discuss to removal actions and needs on 27 Oct 2005 [SEP] Flight safety is a "number one" NOAA goal for all staff. field The published only certification safety process for flight safety belongs to the Department of the Fish Interior. Our Wildlife and partner, Warren Lorenz, for our assessment aerial for leaking/lost and vessels tanks is checking certified" the "OAS paperwork from the Helicopter Evergreen pilot, Russ Bowen. Russ had considerable in experience helicopter operations in the Army. He also had many recent hours in this aircraft as an EMS rescue helicopter and in support of the Fire Service. Russ came to us in Mobile from Louisiana where he flew refinery staff to their Katrina damaged facility.
Crude oil discharge into the River Mississippi from two damaged storage tanks at Bass Enterprises. Location is near mile marker 35 Plaquemines in Parish, LA. Each tank measures 16' high and 290' in diameter. About 88,000 to 90,000 bbl have been released, with 10,000 bbl remaining in tanks. the A large amount of oil is in contained berm, the but a significant of amount lost oil both was the to river and adjacent marsh. Much of the oil up ended on downriver the side of the facility. Cleanup in these areas was intense and in-situ burninig place. Stage took 1 cleanup efforts were finished by All 20DEC05. zones in were Stage 3 on 09FEB06. [SEP] INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES SOUTH COX BAY Location: Mile Marker 35. Coastal Source: Zone Two tank failures Position: 29 degrees 27 minutes 46.1 seconds North, 89 37 degrees minutes 24.6 seconds West Response Status: Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises OSRO: Responding Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 90,000 bbl / 26OCT05 Reported Volume Cumulative Recovered/Date: 36,557 bbl / 26OCT05 Recoverable Estimated Volume Remaining/Date: 1,708 bbl floating contained 6,493 bbl on shore 26OCT05 / Volume Reported Displaced: 10,921 bbl / 26OCT05 Current Efforts: Mitigation Continued to remove from tank oil 1004 to prepare for removal. NOAA, DEQ, and conducted USCG site assessment of Zones 2, 5, and 7. Determination made that Zones 2 and 7 were not ready to progress to Stage 2. Future Mitigation Effort: Remove pooled oil and remove debris in Zones 2 and 7. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: / 15NOV05 19OCT05 Significant Challenges: DEQ noted that facility members were inappropriately burning trash including aerosol canisters. USCG addressed issue with RP on 26OCT05. Refer current to Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES NORTH Location: Mile marker 36. Coastal Zone. Source: Shifted and leaking Position: tanks. 29 degrees minutes 34 32.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 47 minutes 34.1seconds West Response Status: Secured, Active Contained, Product: Recovery. Crude oil. Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises Responding OSRO: Mop Oil Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 10,989 bbl / 26OCT05 Reported Volume Cumulative Recovered/Date: 2,390 bbl / 26OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating 3,234 contained bbl on shore / 26OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Future Mitigation Efforts: Weather permitting burn debris scheduled for Estimated 29OCT05. Date Complete of Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05/19OCT05. Significant NSTR. Challenges: Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES SOUTH COX BAY Location: Mile 35. Marker Coastal Zone Source: Two tank failures Position: 29 degrees 27 minutes 46.1 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 24.6 West seconds Response Active Status: Product: Recovery Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises Responding OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 90,000 / bbl Reported 28OCT05 Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 36,664 bbl / 28OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1,708 bbl floating contained 6,386 bbl on shore / 28OCT05 Reported Volume Displaced: 10,921 bbl / 28OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued to remove oil from tank 1004 to prepare for removal. All canals the at site have been demobilized. Requesting demobilization of skimmers and all but 25 personnel and some work Future boats. Mitigation Effort: Remove pooled oil remove and debris in Zones 2 and 7. Debris in-situ scheduled burn for 29OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05 / Significant 19OCT05 Challenges: DEQ noted that facility members were inappropriately trash burning including aerosol canisters. USCG addressed issue with RP on 26OCT05. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. BASS INCIDENT: ENTERPRISES NORTH Location: Mile marker 36. Zone. Coastal Shifted Source: and leaking tanks. Position: 29 degrees 34 minutes 32.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 47 minutes 34.1seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Crude Product: oil. Facility Bass Owner: Enterprises Responding OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume 10,989 Spilled/Date: bbl / 28OCT05 Reported Cumulative Recovered/Date: Volume 2,449 bbl / 28OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained bbl 3,175 on / shore 28OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued effective efficient and response IAW Future IAP. Mitigation Efforts: Weather permitting debris burn scheduled for 29OCT05. assessment Site scheduled for 01NOV05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage estimate 1/Date was reported: 15NOV05/19OCT05. Significant Challenges: NSTR Refer to current Oil and Budget Resource Summary for details. [SEP] Bass Enterprises North STATUS DATESITE 9 /13/2005 -able to land and conduct initial assessment -Bass reported 10,400 bbl at facility prior to storm -Tanks have not been sounded to yet determine total oil loss -2 of 3 tanks from commingling facility were moved outside of berm storm -SE by section could not be accessed because it is still submerged. In this section are there 4 tanks that are either underwater missing or but there is no sign of -will oil further evaluate when water 9 recedes /14/2005 -Sampling complete -Plan to boom in the event of and rain will begin collecting oil this week 9 -Starting /16/2005 to bring in boom and excavating equipment -Deployed 350 ft of hard boom -Estimated discharge of 10,989 -5,385 bbl bbl expected to have evaporated -5,604 bbl remaining to be recovered Bass Enterprises South Cox Bay DATESITE 9 STATUS /14/2005 -20797 bbl of oil recovered to date from berm area -100 bbl of oil recovered to date from canals -6700 ft of hard boom deployed in back canal -Stopped pumping berm because they were collecting too much water, and will start using drum skimmers -may have another leak in the berm but cannot find it, will continue searching -2 equipment barges in canal offloading (sorbent, equipment skimmers, etc). One more equipment barge will be loaded and en route by 0600 9/15 -using 3 and Marko 1 drum skimmer in canal -Six 200 bbl barges on site -will start washing/deconning tugs and in barges canals -requested help in procuring quarters barge (what is out there is believed to be unsatisfactory). Will check with MARAD. 9 /15/2005 - MARAD vessel Equality State will be at Port Sulfur at 1600 (40 pers capacity) -NY MARAD ship T/V Empire State will be on site 9/17 (500 per 9 capacity) /16/2005 -400 bbl recovered -545 bales of recovered sorbent marsh from -59,860 ft of sorbent boom to deployed date -rope skimmer inside berm active -Expect Equality State to on be site tonight [SEP] is This a very large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet consider connection, downloading the version (smaller JPEG file size) instead of the PDF. [SEP] INCIDENT: BASS ENTERPRISES SOUTH COX BAY Location: Mile Marker 35. Coastal Zone Two Source: tank failures 29 Position: degrees 27 minutes 46.1 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 24.6 minutes seconds West Response Status: Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Oil Crude Facility Owner: Bass Responding Enterprises OSRO: Oil Mop Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: bbl 90,000 / 27OCT05 Cumulative Reported Volume Recovered/Date: 36,606 bbl / 27OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1,708 bbl floating contained 6,444 bbl on shore / 27OCT05 Reported Volume Displaced: 10,921 bbl / 27OCT05 Current Efforts: Mitigation Continued to remove oil from tank 1004 to prepare for removal. All canals at the have site been demobilized. Requesting demobilization skimmers of all and but 25 personnel and some boats. work Future Mitigation Remove Effort: pooled oil and remove debris Zones in 2 and 7. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was 15NOV05 / reported: 19OCT05 Significant Challenges: DEQ noted that members facility were inappropriately trash burning including aerosol canisters. USCG addressed issue with RP on 26OCT05. Refer to current Oil Budget Resource Summary and for INCIDENT: details. BASS ENTERPRISES NORTH Location: Mile marker 36. Coastal Source: Shifted and leaking Zone. Position: tanks. degrees 29 34 minutes 32.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 47 minutes 34.1seconds West Response Status: Contained, Secured, Active Recovery. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Enterprises Bass Responding OSRO: Oil Reported Mop Cumulative Volume 10,989 Spilled/Date: bbl / 27OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 2,394 bbl / 27OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Remaining/Date: Volume 0 bbl floating contained 3,230 bbl on shore / 27OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued effective and efficient IAW response IAP. Future Mitigation Efforts: Weather debris permitting burn for scheduled 29OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05/19OCT05. Significant Challenges: The Army Corps of Engineers is currently discussing an issue concerning the remediation of canal banks in Plaquemines. [SEP] Source USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc Document: [SEP] Oil moving north towards Cox Bay [SEP] Bass overview map 3 of 4 - JPEG [SEP] 26 USCG SEP image South Bass [SEP] USCG Image 9/20 [SEP] were There no follow-up requests for support made to NOAA the Scientific Support on Coordinator this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. USCG [SEP] Significant Spill - Update 9/16
Sweet crude release from two damaged tanks at the Chevron Empire Terminal, across the river from Buras, Plaquemines in Parish, LA. Approximately 24,000 barrels of crude petroleum were lost -- most of spilled the oil is reported to be contained on-site. Stage 1 was completed on 14NOV05. Multiple burns were conducted in a few marsh areas including the Chevron Mobile/Exxon Mobile (XOM) site as well as along the berm where most of the oil spilled was The contained. area was signed off to Stage on 3 29NOV05. [SEP] USCG Image - Chevron Pipeline; Facility Empire - 10/6 [SEP] Image USCG - Chevron Pipeline; Empire Facility - 10/6 The [SEP] bright green grass was the burned area. Photo by Willie Whitmore [SEP] Four days after a burn to remove oil and oiled vegetation from the marsh adjacent to the facility, bullrush (Scirpus) have begun to sprout from their roots. The burn successfully removed large quantities of oil and oiled vegetation damaging without root systems of marsh plants. The roots were insulated from the heat of the burn by standing water in the marsh (which the response team ensured was present before initiating the burn). NOAA photo, taken on 17 Oct 2005 [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PIPELINE; EMPIRE FACILITY Location: Buras, Mile LA, Marker Coastal 30, Zone Source: Ruptured Tank Position: 29 degrees 22 minutes 9.5 seconds North, 89 degrees 32 minutes 5.6 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Recovery Active Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil/Diesel. Facility Owner: Chevron Pipeline. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 23,614 bbl / 01OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 1,438 bbl / 01OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 200 bbl / 01OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Focused on remaining oil in retention Future area. Mitigation Aggressive Efforts: recovery operations. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 03OCT05 / 01OCT05 Significant Challenges: ICS-209 Mass Oil Balance/Oil reflects Budget total oil and water recovered Company reps will ensure future ICS-209???€?s reflect proper reporting. Refer to current Budget Oil and Resource Summary for details. Photo [SEP] provided by DEQ, Louisiana forwarded by SSC NOAA Henry Charlie 5 on Sept 2005. Original file name: KOilSpillResponses050906.doc Source [SEP] Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] INCIDENT: PIPELINE; CHEVRON EMPIRE Location: FACILITY Buras, LA, Mile Marker 30, Coastal Zone Source: Tank Ruptured Position: 29 degrees 22 minutes 9.5 seconds North, 89 degrees 32 minutes 5.6 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Facility Oil/Diesel. Owner: Chevron Pipeline. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Cumulative Reported Volume Spilled/Date: 33,900 bbl / 20OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 1,784 bbl / 20OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl floating contained 0 bbl shore on 20OCT05 / Current Mitigation Efforts: Surveyed burned areas determined that 2.7 bbls burned off. Evacuated personnel in preparation of possible impact by hurricane Wilma. Scare cannons deployed in Zone 7 to deter ducks from entering into contaminated Mitigation Future area. Efforts: passage Await of Hurricane. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage estimate 1/Date reported: was 15NOV05 / 19OCT05 Significant Challenges: Nothing new to report. Refer to current Oil and Budget Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: PIPELINE; CHEVRON EMPIRE FACILITY Location: Buras, LA, Mile Marker 30, Coastal Zone Ruptured Source: Tank Position: 29 degrees 22 9.5 minutes seconds North, 89 degrees 32 minutes 5.6 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Product: Recovery Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil/Diesel. Facility Owner: Chevron Responding Pipeline. OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 23,614 bbl / 30SEP05 Cumulative Reported Volume 2,371 Recovered/Date: bbl 30SEP05 / Estimated Recoverable Volume 300 Remaining/Date: bbl / 30SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Moved to recovery 24-hour Passive operations. efforts used recovery marshline. Future for Efforts: Mitigation Continue recovery Estimated operations. Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was 03OCT05 reported: / Significant Challenges: 30SEP05 Nothing to significant report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] CHEVRON INCIDENT: PIPELINE; EMPIRE FACILITY Location: Buras, LA, Mile 30, Marker Zone Coastal Source: Ruptured Position: Tank 29 degrees 22 minutes seconds 9.5 North, degrees 89 32 5.6 minutes seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Louisiana Product: Heavy Sweet Crude Oil/Diesel. Facility Owner: Chevron Pipeline. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 33,900 bbl / 04OCT05 Reported Volume Cumulative Recovered/Date: 1,780 / bbl 04OCT05 Estimated Volume Recoverable Remaining/Date: 2 bbl / 04OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: recovery Maximize operations in marsh area. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue recovery operations; enter maintenance phase. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: / 04OCT05 04OCT05 Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. Source [SEP] Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] USCG Chevron Empire Exxon barge canal area 11 OCT 05
Broken wellhead, located in the Wagon Wheel Venice near in Plaquemines Parish LA. An estimated 200 bbl of oil was spilled. Sorbents are being used to floating collect [SEP] oil. USCG Image 9/20 [SEP] This entry constitutes Final ResponseLink the Report for this incident. This was one of many oil spills that were responded to as part of the USCG ESF-10 support. INCIDENT: WAGON CHEVRON WHEEL Location: In "Wagon the Wheel" near Venice, LA. Coastal Zone. Source: Broken Wellhead. Response Status: Contained, Secured, Passive Recovery. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: US Environmental Services. Reported Volume Cumulative Spilled/Date: 200 bbl/20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 75 bbl/20Sep05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 42 bbl/20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Non-essential equipment and have personnel left the site. Passive recovery measures have been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume following the passage of Hurricane Rita. Date Estimated of Gross Complete Cleanup/Date Reported: None Reported. Significant Threat Challenges: of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to Oil current Spill Budget and Resource Summary for further detail. [SEP] by Generated Moore Tom [SEP] USCG Image 9/20 [SEP] Generated by Tom Moore. [SEP] Generated Tom by Moore. Generated [SEP] by Tom Moore. This a is large PDF For file. best results, before download opening. If you have a slow Internet downloading connection, consider the version JPEG (smaller file size) instead of PDF. the [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/16 [SEP] CHEVRON WAGON WHEEL DATESITE STATUS /11/ 9 2005 -13 cu yds of solid waste -recovered 62 to bbl date -removing equipment -transitioning into monitoring phase -found 10,000 gal lube oil tank off of the facility in 3-4 of ft water a -will submit 204 for removal of same /12/ 9 2005 -No black or oil skimmable oil present, sheen just -will do overflight Wed at high to tide look for oil 9 /13/ 2005 -Requested site assessment for tomorrow enter to monitoring (USCG, phase NOAA and LA DEQ will co-ordinate) -67 of bbl oily water collected to date -107 cu yd solid of waste 9 /14/ 2005 -oil was seen during assessment -another assessment will be conducted 9/16 -recovered 25 cu yd of sorbent 9 /15/ 2005 -Continuing operations pending new assessment overflight 9 /16/ 2005 bbl -75 of oil/water recovered -139 cu yd solid of waste recovered -100,000 ft of sorbent boom deployed [SEP] USCG Significant Update Spill - 9/17 [SEP] Generated Tom by Moore. This is a large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet connection, consider downloading the JPEG version (smaller file size) instead of the PDF.
Ruptured pipeline that has discharged oil into marshland; located Houma, near LA. Response crews are flushing the marsh to allow to oil be skimmed transferred and into vac trucks. [SEP] CHEVRON FOURCHON DATESITE STATUS 9 /13/ 2005 low -continue water pressure flush of surrounding marsh area -Chevron reached an agreement with land owner access regarding bbl -1050 of mix oil/water recovered -255 cu yd of solid waste recovered -Wildlife 46 oiled birds cleaned, (14 19 DOA, 13 facility death) 5 cats 9 cleaned /14/ 2005 -1140 of bbl oil/water mix recovered -280 cu yd of solid waste recovered -continuing to flush the marsh -Wildlife 55 oiled birds (17 cleaned, 22 DOA, 15 death, facility 1 released) cats 6 cleaned -Requested site assessment to enter monitoring phase on 9/16 9 /15/ 2005 -No wildlife impacted observed -Recovered 1140 bbl of oil/water -Collected 290 cu yd of sorbent -Site assessment for maintenance phase scheduled tomorrow 9 for /16/ 2005 -waiting for results from overflight today release -may manpower and skimmers for other responses -recommend keeping deployed boom in place [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/16 [SEP] Jacqui Michele on 9.17.2005 site [SEP] This entry constitutes Final the ResponseLink Report for incident. this This was one of many oil spills that were responded to as part of the USCG ESF-10 support. INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON PIPELINE Location: Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Position: 29 degrees 07 minutes 30.2 seconds North, 90 degrees minutes 12 28.0 seconds West Response Secured, Contained, Status: Passive Recovery Product: Louisiana Heavy Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and TRUSSCO. Cumulative Reported Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl / 28SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume 631 Recovered/Date: bbl / 28SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl / 28SEP05 Current Mitigation Site Efforts: was reviewed and signed-off. Future Mitigation Efforts: Monitor attenuation natural at site. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 28SEP05/28SEP05 Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Summary Resource for [SEP] details. INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT PIPELINE FOURCHON Location: Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Status: Response Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and TRUSSCO. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl, 20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl, Recoverable 20Seo05 Estimated Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl, 20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Non-essential and equipment personnel have left the site. Passive recovery have measures been in reinforced preparation of inclement Future weather. Efforts: Mitigation Active recovery scheduled is to resume following the passage of Hurricane Rita. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Spill Budget and Resource Summary further detail. for [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON Location: PIPELINE Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Location: 29.1152 N, 90.2066 W Response Status: Secured, Active Contained, Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Facility Crude. Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, TRUSSCO. and Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl, 20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl, Estimated 20Seo05 Recoverable Remaining/Date: 2 Volume bbl, 20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Non-essential equipment and personnel have left site. the Passive recovery have measures been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume following the passage of Hurricane Rita. Estimated Date of Complete Cleanup/Date Gross Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource for Summary details. [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON PIPELINE Location: Port Fourchon. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Pipeline. Position: 29 degrees 07 minutes 30.2 seconds North, 90 degrees 12 28.0 minutes seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery Heavy Product: Louisiana Sweet Crude. Owner: Facility Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and Reported TRUSSCO. Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl / 27SEP05 Cumulative Reported Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl / 27Seo05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 / bbl 27SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Response equipment and personnel are remobilizing. Recovery is ongoing with team sign-off assessment scheduled for Future 28SEP05. Mitigation Efforts: Active recovery is scheduled to resume when containment personnel and equipment have fully deployed. Estimated Date Complete of Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: CHEVRON PORT FOURCHON PIPELINE Location: Port Fourchon. Zone. Coastal Source: Pipeline. Ruptured Location: 29 degrees 07 minutes 30.2 seconds North, 90 degrees 12 minutes 28.0 seconds West Response Status: Contained, Secured, Active Recovery Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude. Facility Owner: Chevron. Responding OSRO: AMPOL, ES&H, and Reported TRUSSCO. Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,276 bbl, 20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 631 bbl, 20Seo05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2 bbl, 20Sep05 Mitigation Current Efforts: Response and equipment personnel are being remobilized. Future Efforts: Mitigation Active recovery is scheduled to resume when response personnel and equipment have deployed. fully Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource details. Summary for [SEP] Jacqui Michel on site 9.17.2005 [SEP] USCG Significant Spill Update 9/17 -
Discharge of sweet fuel crude near the main channel leading into the Gulf. location Incident is in Pass Tante Phine Pass at the Venice Energy Service Co., 5 miles SW of Venice. Oil is contained in the berm, with 3 inches of freeboard. Containment and sorbent boom have deployed been and barges skimmers and are on scene. [SEP] Test burn of roseau cane tentatively set for Monday, October 10, 2005 [SEP] INCIDENT: DYNEGY VENICE Location: Venice, LA. Coastal Zone. Source: storage Two tank failures. Source secured. Position: 29 degrees 14 minutes 11.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 23 1.5 minutes seconds West Response Status: Source secured. 2. Stage Product: Light sweet crude oil. Owner: Facility Responding Dynegy. OSRO: Environmental U.S. Services. *Reported Volume Cumulative Spilled/Date: 592 bbl / 22OCT05 *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 444 bbl / 22OCT05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1 bbl floating contained bbl 0 on shore/ 22OCT05 Mitigation Current Efforts: Completed Stage 1 as of 19OCT05. Future Efforts: Mitigation Managed recovery. Remove stained Roseau IVO facility equipment. Conduct Stage 3 assessment OOA 31OCT05. Completion Date of Gross Cleanup-Stage 1: Completed 19OCT05. Significant Challenges: NSTR. Refer to Oil and current Budget Resource Summary for details. * Received 22OCT05 on ICS-209 24OCT05. Will only be ICS-209 receiving forms from Dynegy Venice once week a due to progression to Stage 2. [SEP] USCG Image Dynegy Venice - [SEP] 9/29/05 USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image - Dynegy - Venice 10/4 [SEP] USCG Dynegy Removal of Rosoe in Zone E 11 OCT 05 [SEP] USCG Image - Dynegy Venice 10/6 - [SEP] INCIDENT: DYNEGY VENICE Location: Wagon Near Wheel Venice, LA. Coastal Zone. Source: Two failures. tank Source secured. Position: 29 degrees 14 minutes 11.7 seconds North, 89 degrees 23 minutes 1.5 seconds West Response secured. Status: Source Product: Light crude oil. Facility Owner: Dynegy. Responding OSRO: U.S. Environmental Services. Reported Cumulative Spilled/Date: Volume 591 bbl / 28SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 388 bbl 28SEP05 / Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 56 bbl / 28SEP05 Mitigation Current Efforts: Response operations resumed. Future Efforts: Mitigation Increased productivity newly with acquired additional resources. Date Estimated of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was Pends. reported: Significant Challenges: Nothing to significant report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] Pocket of Oil near 41B tank [SEP] Image USCG Dynegy Venice - 9/29/05 [SEP] INCIDENT: DYNEGY VENICE Location: Wagon Wheel Near Venice, LA. Coastal Zone. Source: Two tank failures. Source secured. Location: 29.2231 N, 89.3947 Response W Status: Source secured. Product: Light crude oil. Facility Owner: Dynegy. Responding OSRO: U.S. Environmental Services. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: Bbl, 1,664 20Sep05 Cumulative Reported Volume Recovered/Date: 2,522 Bbl, Estimated 20Sep05 Recoverable Remaining/Date: Volume 423 Bbl, 20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Non-essential equipment and personnel have left the site. Passive recovery measures have been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Efforts: Active is recovery scheduled to resume following passage of Hurricane The has Rita. identified RP additional resources, including berthing, personnel, and more capable pumping systems, to be put into operation active once site resumes. Estimated work Date of Complete Gross Reported: Cleanup/Date 23Sep05 / 15Sep05. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image 9/20
Multiple pipelines and facilities located in a remote area 4.5 miles S of Heads Pass. Spill volume unknown. is [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 This [SEP] entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. This was one of many spills product that were responded to as part of the USCG ESF-10 support. Follow up investigation at this site and than more other 120 small spills was shifted the to Pollution Investigation Team. provided NOAA support to multiple USCG activities simultaneously as part of the ESF-10 response effort. [SEP] Image USCG - 9/26 [SEP] Forest Oil STATUS DATESITE 9 /12/ 2005 -CG determined that facility to thought be Vintage Oil's is actually Forest's. -RP POC has been 9 established /13/ 2005 -could not get overflight -owner of facility estimates max discharge potential 14 is bbl 9 /14/ 2005 -could not get overflight 9 2005 /15/ -could not get overflight 9 /16/ 2005 -Site inspected and to judged have mostly -Estimate approximately mud 2 of bbl recoverable oil -Recommended for downgrade
Murphy Oil (Greater New Orleans, St. Bernard Parish LA) -- storage One tank with a 250,000 bbl capacity leaked an estimated 19,500 bbls of medium sour crude oil. Oil released from this tank breached secondary containment and observed was residential in neighborhoods adjacent to the facility. [SEP] 26 SEP (1) [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY Location: OIL Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: medium Arabian crude oil. Facility Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 35,140 bbl / 01OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 18,448 bbl 01OCT05 / Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2,233 bbl / 01OCT05 Current Efforts: Mitigation Recovery operations. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continued recovery operations. Estimated of Date Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 22OCT05 / 01OCT05. Significant Nothing Challenges: significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget Resource and Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: LA. Meraux, Mile 87. Marker Coastal Zone Source: tank. - Ruptured Contained. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Recovery. Active Product: Arabian medium crude oil. Facility Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: bbl 25,110 / 08OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 17,342 bbl / Estimated 08OCT05 Recoverable Volume 518 Remaining/Date: bbl / 08OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Completed bulk sand removal in streets. Used street sweepers for miscellaneous piles. Future Mitigation Efforts: Opening up sewer man holes for upcoming drain flushing. Flushing will begin 12OCT05. Estimated Date of Gross Complete Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 14OCT05 / 08OCT05. Significant State Challenges: Fish and stated Wildlife that no animals are be to removed from site. [SEP] Photo provided by Louisiana DEQ, forwarded by NOAA SSC C. Henry on 5 Sept 2005. Original file name: K050904_1410(LDEQ).jpg [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: LA. Meraux, Mile Marker 87. Zone Source: Coastal Ruptured tank. - Contained. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 25.9 minutes seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Arabian medium crude oil. Facility Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. OSRO: Responding Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,110 bbl / *Reported 24OCT05 Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 17,810 bbl / 24OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume 3 Remaining/Date: bbl floating contained 266 bbl on shore / 24OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Removed vehicles stranded in canals. Continued storm drain flushing. Completed of flushing 16 total (cumulative) streets. Removed containers. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue storm flushing drains. Estimated date complete to flushing operations is OOA (this 29OCT05 may be Estimated extended.) Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 15NOV05/19OCT05. Significant Challenges: One involved truck with storm drain is flushing OOC. ETA to replacement or repair is unknown. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource for Summary details. * Volume was recovered decreased by 220 bbl on 24OCT05 due to improved analysis for crude recovered from contaminated soil. [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Zone Coastal Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained. 29 degrees Position: 56 minutes seconds 4.0 North, 89 56 degrees minutes 25.9 seconds Response West Secured, Status: Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Arabian medium crude oil. Owner: Facility Murphy Oil Responding Refinery. OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,110 bbl / 29OCT05 *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 17,891 bbl / 29OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 3 bbl floating contained bbl 185 on shore / 29OCT05 Mitigation Current Efforts: Completed storm drain flushing 29OCT05. Sorbent on booms are maintained. being Army Corps of are Engineers picking debris up along the canal. Hard boom removal being conducted in Delaron Future canal. Mitigation Efforts: Site assessment rescheduled for Next 04NOV05. with on-site meeting USCG, EPA, DEQ and NOAA is scheduled 03NOV05 for to transfer control of site to EPA. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 04NOV05/UNK. Significant Challenges: NSTR Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, Mile LA. Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained but not secured. Location: 29.9491 N, 89.9305 W Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Product: Mixed crude oil, represented best by Arabian Medium API 30.8. Facility Owner: Bass Enterprises. Responding Garner OSRO: Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 35,140 bbl/20Sep05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 14,937 bbl/20Sep05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 6,497 bbl/20Sep05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Evacuation Plan was enacted. Despite initial plans to continue work on the site as long as possible, the Parish President ordered evacuation full to be completed by 1200 Non-essential today. equipment personnel and have left the site. Passive recovery measures have been reinforced in preparation of inclement weather. Future Mitigation Active Efforts: recovery is scheduled to resume following the passage of Hurricane Rita. Estimated of Date Complete Cleanup/Date Reported: Gross 22Oct05 / 17Sep05. Significant Challenges: Threat of inclement weather from Hurricane Rita. Refer to current Budget Oil and Summary Resource for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Location: Meraux, LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Zone Source: Ruptured tank. - Contained. Position: 29 degrees minutes 56 4.0 seconds 89 North, degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Recovery. Arabian medium crude Product: Facility oil. Owner: Murphy Oil Refinery. Responding OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,110 bbl / 07OCT05 Reported Volume Cumulative Recovered/Date: 17,225 bbl 07OCT05 / *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 599 bbl / 07OCT05* Current Mitigation Efforts: Flushed canals oil and being recovered by booming and skimming operations. Decontaminated demobilized equipment. Mitigation Future Efforts: Develop force reduction plan sign and off criteria for maintenance phase with NOAA, LA and DEQ USCG. Nearby roads need to be cleaned of debris to prior flushing of storm drains. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: 22OCT05 / 04OCT05. Significant Challenges: Flushing of storm drains will be an issue due to lack of storm drain maps. All city maps were destroyed. Water for flushing will be problematic to due no water pressure in water city and fire mains. and US Fish Wildlife captured alligator in cleanup area. Refer to current and Oil Budget Resource Summary for details. *1) Total volume of recovered oil revised ???€? Daily quantities of oil recovered are based on the number/capacity of vacuum trucks discharging each day. This volume was reconciled based on measurements the of volume of and oil water contained in the Recovered Oil Tank (150-2). The total was volume increased by 175 bbls. 2) Total volume evaporated ???€? The volume of oil evaporated was originally estimated at 40% of the amount using spilled the ADIOS 2 model. The estimated amount evaporated had been reduced to 30% because we believe the model ADIOS will the overstate amount evaporated because it is designed to estimate evaporation of spills from open water. The oil spilled was contained deeper in pools than would with occur an open water spill due to the containment areas and canals in which most of the oil collected. The evaporation estimate has further been reduced to 28%. Onshore 3) volume revised ???€? volume The of oil remaining onshore has been reduced to shoreline reflect washing operations conducted this week. 4) Contained Floating, volume revised The ???€? volume of oil to estimated be floating, contained was revised based on the changes volume to the other categories.* [SEP] INCIDENT: MURPHY OIL Meraux, Location: LA. Mile Marker 87. Coastal Source: Zone tank. Ruptured - Contained but not secured. Position: 29 degrees 56 minutes 4.0 seconds North, 89 degrees 56 minutes 25.9 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained, Active Product: Recovery. crude Mixed oil. Facility Owner: Enterprises. Responding Bass OSRO: Garner Environmental. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 35,140 bbl / 28SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 16,920 bbl / 28SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 1,686 bbl / 28SEP05 Current Efforts: Mitigation Continued focused efforts on oil canal removal. Overflights completed for site supervisor. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue aggressive operations. recovery Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Nothing significant report. to to Refer current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image - Murphy Oil 10/23 - [SEP] USCG Significant Spill - Update [SEP] 9/17 Photo provided by Louisiana DEQ, forwarded by NOAA SSC Charlie Henry on 5 Sept 2005. Original file name: KOilSpillResponses050906.doc
Report of a sheen unknown) (area coming from displaced a tank. Location is of N Pilot Town, on the W bank of Mississippi. the [SEP] Initial sites identified as potential incidents are overlaid on a satellite [SEP] image. USCG Significant Spill Update - 9/17 [SEP] Tank North of Pilot Town DATESITE STATUS 9 /12/ 2005 -MRC Admiral is en route -Have boomed with hard boom and 2 rows of sorbents 9 /13/ 2005 -200 ft of hard boom deployed -sorbent boom has been removed and replaced -tank has 400 capacity bbl -leak apparently under water -flange above waterline may be used to remove remaining product (not recommended at this time) 9 /14/ 2005 -NRC Admiral got underway after resuppyling - ETA is 1200 9/15 -plan to change out the sorbent /15/ 9 2005 -Admiral on site -Collected and replace of 300' sorbent boom cleared -ACoE debris tank around enabling Admiral to get close 80 -Estimate bbl in left -Looking tank into pumping product from tank to Admiral's 150 bbl 9 /16/ 2005 Tug -Identified Angelique E as asset possible to deliver barge with portable to tank site [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 USCG [SEP] Spill Significant Update - 9/16 [SEP] INCIDENT: TANK DISPLACED ALONG RIVERBANK Location: North of Pilot Town, West Bank. Coastal. Source: Tank Location: 29.1847 N, 89.5375 W Response Status: Product: Unknown oil. Facility Owner: Unkown. Responding OSRO: OSRV ADMIRAL o/s with 1 CG personnel and 7 contractors. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: Unknown. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: Current Efforts: Mitigation Tank has been emptied and all recovered contents will be disposed of. OSRV ADMIRAL has departed the scene. Future Mitigation No Efforts: future plans for further recovery. Will be from removed future summaries. Date Estimated of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: None reported. Significant None. Challenges: Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] INCIDENT: DISPLACED TANK ALONG RIVERBANK Location: North of Town, Pilot West Bank. Coastal. Source: Tank Response Product: Status: Unknown oil. Facility Owner: Unkown. OSRO: Responding OSRV ADMIRAL o/s with 1 CG personnel and 7 contractors. Reported Volume Cumulative Spilled/Date: Unknown. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: Estimated Volume Recoverable Current Remaining/Date: Mitigation Efforts: has Tank been emptied and all recovered contents will be disposed of. OSRV ADMIRAL has departed the scene. Future Mitigation Efforts: No future plans for further recovery. Will be removed from future summaries. Estimated Date of Complete Cleanup/Date Gross None Reported: reported. Significant Challenges: None. Refer to Oil current Budget and Resource Spill Summary for further detail.
A 20 diameter inch near pipeline Port Sulfur (MM35), by supported a berm that lost 150 in feet the hurricane, ruptured with a 2-inch by hole. 6-inch An unknown amount of petroleum has been released into nearby a marsh and created a sheen 5 6 to miles long. Drum skimmers are being used in the marsh and 7,000 feet of boom has been deployed in the [SEP] marsh. USCG Image Shell - Nairn - 10/5 [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West of side Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Position: line. 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees minutes 37 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & Reported MSRC. Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl 14OCT05. / Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 255 / bbl 14OCT05. Recoverable Estimated Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 10 bbl on shore / 14 OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: No field operations conducted. Future Mitigation Efforts: Some containment operations to resume on 24OCT05. Estimated Date of Gross Complete Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Legal issues cleaning regarding of adjoining private properties are again a problem. However facility is willing restart to operations once adjoining private property owner agrees allow to Katrina clean oil up. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] INCIDENT: NAIRN SHELL Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: line. Ruptured Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Louisiana Heavy Crude Sweet Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. *Reported Volume Cumulative Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / 28OCT05. *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: bbl 255 / 28OCT05. *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 10 bbl on shore / 28OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Facility management has all private identified property owners Zones in 1,3,4,5,6, and 7. Continued effective and efficient response IAP. IAW Future Mitigation Efforts: Contact private property owners to gain access to impacted land. Crews to work on zone 4, then 6, then 1. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date was estimate reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: NSTR Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for * details. Did not receive [SEP] ICS-209. updated INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port LA. Sulfur, Mile 35 Marker (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured pipe. 29 Position: degrees 25 4.9 minutes seconds North, 89 degrees minutes 37 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured (Tank Empty). Site was contained but is currently uncontained. Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Owner: Facility Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,245 bbl / 27SEP05. Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 95 bbl / 27SEP05. Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 30 bbl / 27SEP05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Reassessed oil impact via overflight of nearby marsh in aftermath of Hurricane Rita. Future Mitigation Efforts: Develop booming strategies for sheen with sorbent boom. Date of Estimated Complete Gross Cleanup/Date Reported: 10OCT05 / 15SEP05. Significant Challenges: All boom in nearby marsh in disarray and ineffective due to high winds and waters from Hurricane Rita. current Refer to Budget Oil and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] USCG Image - Shell Nairn - 10/5 [SEP] USCG Image - Shell Nairn - 9/30 INCIDENT: [SEP] SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured Position: line. 29 25 minutes degrees 4.9 North, seconds 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Contained. Secured, Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H MSRC. & *Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl 28OCT05. / *Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 255 bbl / 28OCT05. *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 10 bbl on shore / 28OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: management Facility has identified private all property owners Zones in 1,3,4,5,6, and 7. Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Found abandoned pipeline isolated with minimal oil. Clean-up completed for newly discovered oil on 29OCT05. Future Mitigation Efforts: Contact private owners property to gain access to impacted land. Estimated Date Complete of Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate reported: was Pends. Significant Challenges: NSTR Refer to current Oil and Budget Resource Summary for details. * Did not receive updated ICS-209. INCIDENT: [SEP] SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Marker Mile 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes seconds 4.9 North, 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Product: Contained. Heavy Louisiana Sweet Crude Facility Oil. Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & *Reported MSRC. Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / 14OCT05. *Reported Volume Cumulative Recovered/Date: 255 14OCT05. / bbl *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 10 bbl on shore / 14 OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Debris removed along private property line. Future Mitigation Site assessment Efforts: to be scheduled Marsh for side of levee. Date Estimated of Gross Complete Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Legal issues regarding cleaning of adjoining properties private are again a problem. However facility is willing to restart operations once adjoining private property owner agrees to allow Katrina oil clean up. Refer to current Oil Budget and Summary Resource for details. * Did not receive ICS-209 from Shell Nairn. [SEP] INCIDENT: SHELL NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, Mile LA. Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Ruptured Source: line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 seconds North, 89 37 degrees minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Contained. Secured, Heavy Product: Louisiana Crude Sweet Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding ES&H OSRO: & MSRC. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 3,315 bbl / Reported 30SEP05. Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 155 bbl / 30SEP05. Recoverable Estimated Volume 10 Remaining/Date: bbl / 30SEP05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Aggressive recovery operations. Future Mitigation Efforts: recovery Continue operations. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Threat to workers in area of cleanup from an alligator nursery hatch. LA. Dept. of Wildlife and fisheries is training workers in area how on to conduct themselves the in vicinity of the Refer alligator. to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. [SEP] Image USCG Shell Nairn - 9/28/05 [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] SHELL INCIDENT: NAIRN Location: Port Sulfur, LA. Mile Marker 35 (West side of Mississippi). Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured line. Position: 29 degrees 25 minutes 4.9 North, seconds 89 degrees 37 minutes 1.8 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Heavy Product: Louisiana Sweet Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Shell. Responding OSRO: ES&H & MSRC. Reported Cumulative Spilled/Date: Volume 3,315 bbl 02OCT05. / Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 215 bbl / 02OCT05. Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 10 bbl / 02OCT05. Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued recovery operations. Future Mitigation Efforts: Anticipating for need gross oil signoff on 05OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate was 05OCT05/02OCT05. reported: Significant Challenges: Rattle snakes discovered near pipeline. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details.
Discharge of sweet crude petroleum from an above-ground tank the into Mississippi River at mile marker 3, caused by a microwave and tower fell that pierced the tank. A pipeline also was breached. leak The occured within the containment of berm the facility. Much of the oil most was likely lost/released/dispersed during the Approximately hurricane. 22,685 barrels were recovered. The entire facility was moved into Stage 3 26OCT05. on [SEP] USCG -Shell Image Pilot Town - 10/7 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Image - [SEP] 9/26 INCIDENT: SHELL PILOT TOWN Location: Pilot Mile Town, LA. Marker 3. Coastal Zone. Source: Pipeline breach. Position: 29 degrees 11 minutes 3.6 seconds North, 89 degrees 15 minutes 0.2 seconds West Response Contained. Status: Product: Heavy Louisiana Sweet Oil. Crude Facility Owner: Shell Responding OSRO: & ES&H MSRC Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 25,435 bbl / 03OCT05.* Cumulative Reported Volume Recovered/Date: 20,080 bbl / 03OCT05.* Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 2,605 bbl 03OCT05* Mitigation / Current Efforts: Transferred oil from a with tank small hole to another storage tank and begin tanks storage decanting. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue to decant tanks. storage Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date estimate reported: was 13OCT05 / 03OCT05. Significant Challenges: Nothing to report. significant Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * Reported cumulative volume spilled reflects a clerical error in historical data and is reconciled. [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] Source Document: USCG_sit_brief_14sep05.doc [SEP] Prepared by Tom Moore. This is a large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet connection, consider downloading the JPEG version (smaller file size) instead of the PDF. [SEP] USCG Image -Shell Town Pilot - 10/5 [SEP] PILOT TOWN DATESITE STATUS 9 /12/ 2005 -received spud barges -hopper still barge en route -recovering oiled sorbents and isolating temporary it in storage -Containment area leaching oil black slowly on west side where earlier repair was -start pumping tank into 1506 OSRB 570 -2600 bbl was into pumped tank 1547 from the containment 9 /13/ 2005 bbl -2700 into pumped tank 14-57 from -Additional berm 400 ft of hard boom for 3000 ft total deployed -a small leak was noted in tank14-57 -2nd spud barge being -requested waked no zone wake was denied but slow speed (< 10knt) was approved -Recovered 20 bags of sorbent replaced and 9 /14/ 2005 -1500 ft of sorbent boom deployed -300 ft of snare deployed -20 cu yds of oiled sorbents collected -oil level in berm decreased one ft -14-57 pumped being barge into 560 due to leak -Pilot boats are now slowing down 9 /15/ 2005 11206 -Transfered bbl from 1506 tank to barge 570 for a total of 25364 bbl removed -10 cu yds of sorbent collected of -2000' hard boom, 4500' of sorbent, and 1000' of snare deployed 9 /16/ 2005 -Tank 1457 stabilized has (no further of loss product anticipated) -Tank1505 has stabilized (no further loss of product -500 anticipated) additional ft of snare deployed -Barge 402 is 1 ft from being full. -Operations continue to waked be by river traffic [SEP] Aerial overview 3 of 4 - [SEP] JPEG USCG Shell Pilot Town 14 OCT 05 (5) [SEP] Prepared by Tom Moore. This is a large PDF file. For best results, download before opening. If you have a slow Internet connection, consider downloading JPEG the version (smaller file size) instead of the PDF.
Sundown East: Ruptured tanks and piping. Estimated leak volume: cumulative 450 Remote bbl. site with difficult access, located at Potash, LA, E bank of R, Mississippi mile marker 40. Sundown West: Ruptured tanks and piping. Estimated spill volume: 320 cumulative bbl crude medium oil. Remote site, located at Potash, LA, just N of Port Sulphur on W bank of Mississippi. [SEP] photo by William [SEP] Whitmore INCIDENT: SUNDOWN EAST Location: Potash, East LA, bank of Mississippi. Mile Marker 40. Coastal Source: Zone. Ruptured fuel storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 29 degrees 48.3 minutes North, seconds 89 degrees 41 38.5 minutes seconds West Status: Response Secured, Contained. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,236 bbl / Reported 24OCT05 Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: bbl 376 / 24OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained onshore ???€?undetermined???€? / 24OCT05 Current Mitigation Cleaned Efforts: oil pooled along perimeter of property. Future Efforts: Mitigation site Possible assessment by NOAA, DEQ, and USCG on 28OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Week of 23OCT05/19OCT05 Significant Challenges: NSTR. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * minor Some residual oiling still persists and will be removed with sorbent material. INCIDENT: SUNDOWN WEST Potash, Location: ???€? LA Just North of Port Sulfur on the West Bank of the river. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees minutes 28 19.6 seconds 89 North, degrees 41 minutes 54.3 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Product: Contained. Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding ES&H. OSRO: Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 320 bbl / 24OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume 197 Recovered/Date: bbl / 24OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Remaining/Date: 0 Volume bbl floating contained 123 bbl on shore 24OCT05 / Current Mitigation Efforts: No field (see operations. significant challenges.) Future Mitigation Efforts: Pends (see significant challenges.) Estimated Date Complete of Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 28OCT05/21OCT05. Challenges: Significant A action class law suit stemming from Katrina has been against filed West. Sundown It is unknown at this time if it will response impact operations. Remaining areas to clean are believed to be on private property (undetermined property whether owner is part of law suit). However, contaminated land may located be on areas that considered are to be DOT easements and Parrish drainage controlled ditches with access from public highway. Response operations pend while determination is made. Refer current to Oil Budget and Resource for Summary details. * No free oil remains on the site. The remaining 123 bbl an is estimate of oil that is contained in the soils near the facility and on stained vegetation. [SEP] USCG Sundown West Tank on river levee MST 1 Highfill Oct 11 05 [SEP] USCG Image - 9/26 [SEP] USCG Sundown Image East Facility (1) [SEP] USCG Image - Sundown East - 10/08 [SEP] INCIDENT: SUNDOWN EAST Location: Potash, East LA, bank of Mississippi. Marker Mile 40. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 29 minutes 48.3 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 38.5 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,236 bbl / 26OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume 376 Recovered/Date: bbl / *Estimated 26OCT05 Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained ???€?undetermined???€? onshore / 26OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: No field operations conducted. Future Mitigation Efforts: Site assessment scheduled for 28OCT05. Estimated Date Complete of Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate reported: was 28OCT05/26OCT05 Significant Challenges: NSTR. Refer to current Budget Oil and Resource Summary for details. * Some minor residual oiling still and persists will be removed with sorbent material. INCIDENT: SUNDOWN Location: WEST Potash, LA ???€? Just North of Port Sulfur on the West Bank of the river. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks piping. and Position: 29 degrees 28 minutes 19.6 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 54.3 seconds Response West Status: Contained. Secured, Product: Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: bbl 320 / 26OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: bbl 197 / 26OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained 123 bbl on shore / 26OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Facility is working with state DOT representatives determine to of location easement on impacted private property. challenges.) (see significant Future Efforts: Mitigation Pends (see significant challenges.) Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: 28OCT05/21OCT05. Significant Challenges: A class action law suit stemming from has Katrina filed been against Sundown West. is It unknown at this time if it impact will response operations. Remaining to areas clean are believed to be on private property (undetermined whether property owner is part of law suit). However, land contaminated may be located areas on that are considered to be DOT easements and Parrish controlled drainage ditches with from access public Response highway. pend operations while this determination is made. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * free No oil remains on the site. The remaining 123 bbl is an estimate of oil is that contained in the soils near the facility and stained on vegetation. [SEP] USCG Image - Sundown East - 9/30 [SEP] INCIDENT: SUNDOWN EAST Location: Potash, LA, bank East of Mississippi. Mile Marker 40. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 29 minutes 48.3 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 38.5 seconds West Response Status: Contained. Secured, Product: Crude Facility oil. Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding ES&H. OSRO: Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 1,236 bbl / 27OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 376 bbl / 27OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: 0 bbl floating contained onshore ???€?undetermined???€? / 27OCT05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued effective and efficient response IAW IAP. Reduced to minimal crew for Saturday, returning Sunday. Future on Efforts: Mitigation Site assessment rescheduled for 31OCT05. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date was estimate 28OCT05/26OCT05 Significant NSTR. reported: Challenges: Refer to current Budget Oil Resource and Summary for details. * Some minor residual oiling persists still will and be removed with sorbent material. INCIDENT: SUNDOWN WEST Location: Potash, LA ???€? North Just of Port Sulfur on the West Bank of the river. Coastal Zone. Source: Ruptured oil storage and tanks piping. Position: 29 degrees 28 minutes 19.6 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 54.3 seconds West Contained. Response Status: Product: Secured, Crude Oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Volume Cumulative Spilled/Date: 320 bbl / 27OCT05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 197 bbl / 27OCT05 *Estimated Recoverable Remaining/Date: Volume 0 bbl floating contained 123 bbl on shore / 27OCT05 Current Mitigation Facility Efforts: is working with state DOT representatives to access easements along highway for clean-up. (see significant challenges.) Future Mitigation Efforts: Pends (see Estimated significant challenges.) Date of Complete Gross Cleanup-Stage 1/Date estimate was reported: Significant 28OCT05/21OCT05. Challenges: class A action law suit stemming from Katrina has been filed against Sundown West. is It at unknown this time if it will impact response operations. Remaining to areas clean believed are to be on private property (undetermined whether property owner is part of law suit). However, contaminated land may be located on areas that are considered to be DOT easements and Parrish controlled drainage ditches with access from public highway. Response operations pend while this determination is made. Site survey rescheduled for 31OCT05. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. * No free remains oil the on site. The remaining 123 bbl is an estimate of oil that is contained in the soils near the facility and on stained vegetation. [SEP] INCIDENT: SUNDOWN EAST Location: Potash, LA, East bank of Mississippi. Mile Marker 40. Coastal Zone. Ruptured Source: oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 29 minutes 48.3 seconds North, 89 degrees 41 minutes 38.5 West seconds Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude oil. Facility Owner: Sundowner Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: bbl 450 / 30SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 255 bbl / 30SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: bbl 130 / 30SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Continued aggressive recovery operations. Future Mitigation Efforts: Continue aggressive operations. recovery Estimated Date of Complete Cleanup/Date Gross estimate was reported: 06OCT05 Significant / 30SEP05 Challenges: Nothing significant to report. Refer to current Oil Budget and Resource Summary for details. INCIDENT: SUNDOWN Location: WEST Potash, LA ???€? Just North of Port Sulfur on the West Bank of the river. Coastal Zone. Ruptured Source: oil storage tanks and piping. Position: 29 degrees 28 minutes 19.6 seconds 89 degrees North, 41 minutes 54.3 seconds West Response Status: Secured, Contained. Product: Crude Oil. Facility Sundowner Owner: Energy. Responding OSRO: ES&H. Reported Cumulative Volume Spilled/Date: 320 bbl / 30SEP05 Reported Cumulative Volume Recovered/Date: 183 bbl / 30SEP05 Estimated Recoverable Volume Remaining/Date: Less then 2 bbl / 30SEP05 Current Mitigation Efforts: Aggressive cleanup operations oiled on levees. Future Mitigation Efforts: Company representatives requested have and applied for debris burn permit for oiled debris. Estimated Date of Complete Gross Cleanup/Date was estimate reported: Pends. Significant Challenges: Nothing
Potential spill. Multiple pipelines and facilities located in a remote area at Pass 24/Dixon South Bay [SEP] This entry constitutes the Final Report for this incident. This was one of many spills product that were responded to as part of the ESF-10 USCG support. Vintage [SEP] Oil STATUS DATESITE 9 /12/ 2005 -2 work barges and + small site crews on -Dixon Bay Platform boomed, contained and secure 9 /13/ 2005 -Vintage claims no ongoing leak in area because claim they they pumped tanks their down prior to storm and filled with salt water -14 bbl of unaccounted oil for 9 /14/ 2005 -could not get overflight 9 /15/ 2005 -could not get overflight 9 /16/ 2005 overflown -was 9/15 and 9/16 -only light and sheen unrecoverable observed -recommend downgrading
This is a general Incident for information covering non-site specific pollution events in Louisiana. [SEP] Photo provided by Louisiana DEQ, forwarded by NOAA SSC on 5 Sept 2005. Original file name: [SEP] K050904_1434(LDEQ).jpg Removing the yellow hard boom from the retention at pond the Chevron Empire near facility, the end of successful cleanup operations. White sorbent boom along the of bank pond the continues collect to remobilized sheen. Photo by U.S. Guard, Coast 10/6/05 [SEP] Aids to Navigation Map - Mississippi River Gulf Outlet - Southwest Passage, prepared 8 September by the Situation Unit [SEP] Dynegy Venice on facility October 5, 2005, still partially submerged after hurricane-caused flooding. Light tan-colored material is cane grass that was loose blown by Hurricane Katrina, and has been deposited at the facility. [SEP] Overflight photo provided by NOAA SSC. Original 100_3380.JPG filename: [SEP] USCG Image - Dynegy Venice - 10/1 [SEP] View of Islands Chandeleur looking North from its extent. Southern The islands are located offshore of the River Mississippi delta. [SEP] USCG Image - 9/28 [SEP] USCG Image 9/28 - [SEP] Washing down the oiled retention berm at the Shell Pilot Town facility, using pumped water from the Mississippi River. Photo by U.S. Coast Guard, 10/7/05 [SEP] Workers removing oiled cane grass at the Dynegy Venice Cane facility. grass was blown from surrounding marshland and deposited at facility the by Hurricane Katrina. [SEP] A pit small in the foreground of this is photo being used as a collection point spilled for oil within the retention area around damaged storage tanks. Oil that in the collects pit is vacuumed and up removed. Photo by U.S. Coast Guard, 10/7/05
NOAA assisted multiple incidents with on the Mississippi Delta in resulting Louisiana from Hurricane Ivan. [SEP] This spill, which occurs in the Breton National Wildlife Refuge Raphael along Pass consisted of bbls 362 of oil spilled into marsh the due to a leaking tank from the hurricane. On Sept 22nd, LA DEQ, USCG, USFWS, and NOAA met the with ES and H individual representing the RP. Most of the naturally oil has dispersed and due moved to the high water and wind (water at this time, thanks to east winds, was 2-3' above normal high tide). SCAT by boat done by was DEQ LA and NOAA. A good estimate oil of remaining couldn't established, be but most of the oil gone. is I'd estimate maybe bbls 5-10 left. are oil Most observed was sheening (silver and rainbow with patches colored) black of oil in found the reseau cane. The USFWS expressed concern for waterfowl and birds and wishes to have of most the cane that is oiled near the facility The cut. up clean method recommended for rest the the of area and the area surrounding the facility as well was a passive up clean utilizing sorbent 1600' boom. of it brought was out later that day. LA DEQ, USFWS, and USCG are returning Friday for round another of observations. Due to weather are there no ops today. [SEP] Yesterday afternoon there were differences what in the situation was on scene concerning how much oil was on the water. Estimates varied from 25 to bbls. Because 500 of this, remediation approaches, concerns, etc varied from the different groups. After Shell took over responsibility for the clean up (note, NOT the oil) they contacted the NOAA SSC expressing an interest to use Phone dispersants. calls were made to the parties appropriate for dispersant approval, and before the end of day the on Friday, Sept. 24th, clearances for dispersal application by boat (in depths greater then 20???€?) had been approved by all of the concerned parties except for the EPA (who had yet respond). to At the end of the day Friday, the big issues were the unknowns on what exactly was going on out scene on while the oil to continued leak. An evening overflight conducted by LA found DEQ the thicker oil heading south, with southern the tip estimated at 29d 12.5???€?N, 088d 58.55???€?W. Word from the first morning overflight on Sept. Saturday 25 by DEQ brought news of large amounts of oil in the areas of Lonesome Bayou, North Pass, Pass A Loutre, and Blind Bay. The Coast Guard RRT liason was then contacted and contacted he the EPA who approved the possible use of dispersants by boat or air, so the use of dispersants has been approved by the RRT. The NOAA Scientific Support Team arrived on scene to observe pictures from the morning overflight. There was significant oiling in the mentioned areas above, with oil from streaking the of point origin 15.62???€?N, 29d 089d 01.2???€?W south as far 29d as 09.8???€?N, 88d 01.25???€?W, approximately 6.8 miles from the site. spill The Louisiana Responder was on scene yesterday, the Mississippi Responder and Grand Bay arrived on scene this Decanting morning. has been approved. The plan for use of the skimmers to is have the Mississippi Responder stay close to the leaking source, with the Louisiana Responder behind catching the oil entrained by the Mississippi Responder. The noon overflight by with NOAA on board was similar. There are slicks streaking south from the source down from edge the of North Pass to the edge westward of Lonesome Bay. The oil then is moving thru a cut (that boomed) is down into Pass A Loutre and across a sandbar/marsh area into Bay. Blind The in oil Blind Bay is mostly sheen, does but have some streaking slicks in it. There was little sheen visible west of Lonesome Bay. There was also some oil in the North and South Passes. Shoreline impact has occurred along the Gulf edge near North Pass (east of Lonesome Bay) and in the marsh area between the North and South pass of Pass A Loutre. Booms have been put the along shores of Lonesome Bay as as well in the from cuts Lonesome Bay into Pass A Loutre. There is boom along the northern shore of Pass Loutre, including A in of front the Chevron, Shell, and BP facilities. At 1800 there was a conference with call the on-scene response team and the members the of RRT for the use of dispersants night. over During the day, all effort was made to improve on-water mechanical recovery, but the potential for effective night (or operations lack of effectiveness) propted of the considerition dispersing at night at the mitigation. source for A brief was to given the members of the RRT, including some of following facts: the -The source appears to be leaking but less, still represent a threat to shoreline and -The wildlife. ops dive are planning on starting tomorrow morning, they had difficulty arriving today. -The pipeline where the source is occurring is in 42-43???€? of water. -The location is just under 3 miles from shore -During an overflight today, it was observed by the USFWS that are there roughly 2,000 birds at risk of oiling, 10% or which are already Hazing oiled. was approved and conducted in certain Following areas. all these details, and questions from the RRT concerning dispersant application, the process was approved. A monitoring team is in route to provide federal oversight and every effort will be made to get them on-scene. Dispersants will be applied by the Grand Bay overnight. Assessments may made be by the Gulf Strike Team the next morning depending on logistics. The plan for is tomorrow to check the success of the dispersants at first light, to commence salvage/repair of the pipeline by and divers, bring to in expandable U-shaped a boom to deploy around the source to aid skimmers the with capture. The NOAA Scientific Support Team continues to the work incident. [SEP] A bubbling source was viewed helicopter by at 29d 14.3N, 02.6W. 089d Specifics are not known. yet [SEP] Oil was spotted along the terminal end of the east side of SW Pass. Specifics concerning the amount, type, and coverage area are not known. yet The source also is unknown. The USFWS monitoring is the area closely with concerns for wildlife in the region. [SEP] This spill was estimated at 1 (though bbl it could have been more) and was being actively by cleaned ES and H when USFWS, NOAA, LA DEQ, and USCG reps arrived. site The is located in the Breton NWR. The area was boomed with off containment and sorbent boom and roseau cane that heavily was and oiled bent was being cut and bagged. This spill occured when a tank fell over during hurricane. the The area is possibly small, 1-2 acres, with little overall damage. They had fairly good containment, except for one or two areas which were pointed out the to clean up and crew, immediate action was then The taken. Coast Guard and USFWS will continue to the monitor clean up. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened for Hurricane Ivan Oil Spills, Mississippi Delta. There is one hotline for multiple spills in the MS Delta. [SEP] OK this is strange a one because the winds have been from the E at 20 knots and the oil reported is moving to the SE. Turns out this is possible because the bathymetry is almost W to E. The source is right along the slope and this there means is a current running west to east the at source. Obviously with the windage at about .6 knots, means this current the is gotta be at least 3/4 of the knot or more. I'm guessing high as at 1.5 knots because it is being fed by the strong persistent East winds that will bring water along the coastline from the East and from whatever runoff is entering the Gulf East from the of Miss R. This is only the explanation for the oil moving into wind. the So we go with it until wrong. proven The bathymetry turns to the south the at end of Pass A Loutre, at about 6 - 7 miles from the source. This means the current will turn to the south and eventually to the SW. The oil too will turn south. After this happens, the E winds will be perpendicular to the and should currents start moving the oil toward shore. Most likely impacts would be between Blind Bay and Garden I Bay. the If oil is only a thousand few gallons of an in API the mid 30's or it higher, may not persist enough long to impact shore, unless it emulsifies. In fact the 6 slick mile may have reached a state steady where it is evaporating and as dispersing fast as it's leaking. We shall see if this is case the on
acid; Phosporic; hurricane; Verbal/DAC [SEP] response Hotline has been opened to capture information about the Cargill acid spill in Tampa, FL.
NOAA SSC and information management support from GenWest was requested on scene by USCG FOSC from MSO San Juan. MSO San Juan is currently involved in responses several as actions a result of Georges Hurricane impact on the island. response These actions included a pipeline break where 5,000-7,000 gals. of fuel entered oil an area of mangroves. Reportedly Puerto Rico DNER and the Army Engineers Corps of have permits issued to allow cleaning in the areas. mangrove Additionally a dry docked broke tanker free the during storm and sank in the middle of San Juan harbor. This vessel has 250 tons IFO of 180, and 30 of tons lube oil aboard. Also a U. S. Customs vessel with 5000 of gals diesel aboard is ran aground on shore. At Roosevelt Roads a Navy vessel is partially submerged with 2000 of diesel gals 200 and gals. of lube oil. An aircraft is down in an area inaccessible near the San Juan Airport with 600 gals. of aviation fuel and hydraulic aboard. USCG 7. district Keyword: bioremediation, potential spill, salvage. [SEP] The Area Coastal Contingency Plan for Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands, NOAA. 1993. Shoreline Countermeasures Manual: Tropical Coastal Environments. Seattle: Office of Ocean Resources Conservation and Assessment, NOAA. 102 pp. NOAA. 1994. Results of shoreline cleaning agent testing during the Morris Berman J. Spill, Rico. Puerto HAZMAT Report 94-7. Seattle: Hazardous Materials Response and Assessment Division, NOAA. 10 pp + appendix. NOAA. 1994. Shio. Tide computer program (prototype). Seattle: Hazardous Materials Response Assessment and Division, NOAA NOAA. Hotline #333, 25 Reports NOAA Nautical charts USCG POLREPS for the Post Hurricane Georges Response, [SEP] files Attached are from the briefing executive prepared package for Admiral Loy the Commandant the of Coast who Guard visited scene the 01 OCT 98. For those reading this message via FirstClass Client software: Mac users: Option-double-click to view, print, or save the attached PICT files. Windows users: Control-double click to view download or the attached PICT files. File EXBRF_01. key: PICT - Cover Page EXBRF_02. - PICT Impacts to Puerto Rico EXBRF_03. PICT - Impacts to MSO San Juan EXBRF_04. PICT - Command Objectives EXBRF_05. - PICT Incident Information and Index EXBRF_06. PICT Caribbean - Petroleum Refinery Spill EXBRF_07. PICT - DC-3 Aircraft Crash EXBRF_08. PICT - M/V Rio Neveri Grounding EXBRF_09. PICT - Navy YFU-83 Vessel Sinking EXBRF_10. - PICT M/V El Porton Grounding EXBRF_11. PICT - Area Small Salinas Boat Sinkings PICT EXBRF_12. - Isleta Marina Boat Collapse House EXBRF_13. PICT - Island-wide Small Boat Sinkings/Groundings PICT EXBRF_14. - Weather [SEP] Attached files are from the executive briefing package prepared for Admiral Loy the Commandant of the Coast Guard who visited the scene 01 OCT 98. For those reading this message via FirstClass Client software: users: Mac Option-double-click to view, print, or save the attached PICT files. Windows users: Control-double click to view or download the attached PICT files. File key: EXBRF_01. PICT - Cover Page EXBRF_02. PICT - Impacts to Rico Puerto EXBRF_03. PICT - Impacts MSO to San EXBRF_04. Juan PICT - Command Objectives EXBRF_05. PICT - Incident Information and Index EXBRF_06. PICT - Caribbean Petroleum Refinery Spill EXBRF_07. PICT - DC-3 Crash Aircraft EXBRF_08. PICT - Rio M/V Neveri Grounding PICT EXBRF_09. - Navy Vessel YFU-83 Sinking EXBRF_10. PICT - M/V El Porton Grounding EXBRF_11. PICT - Salinas Area Small Boat Sinkings PICT EXBRF_12. - Marina Isleta House Boat Collapse EXBRF_13. PICT Island-wide - Small Boat Sinkings/Groundings EXBRF_14. PICT - Weather [SEP] NOAA provided on-scene support for this response from September 28 through October 3, 1998. The SSC worked closely with PRDNER, USCG, PR Environmental Quality Board (EQB), EPA, and USFWS to scientific coordinate technical and input used for the response. The served SSC as lead the technical specialist for within the Incident Command System (ICS) with the assistance of an information management specialist provided by NOAA. HAZMAT's provided MASS forecasts weather during the response. The SSC worked closely with NOAA HAZMAT resources at risk support to evaluate marsh cleanup options for the Caribbean Petroleum Refinery and develop leak to sound cleanup for recommendations the USCG EPA. and NOAA will a lead scientific monitoring study of impacted the wetland to observe vegetation recovery and assess the need for further cleanup actions. NOAA HAZMAT's Safety Officer worked with the USCG's Safety Officer on-scene to develop plans safety for various the incidents being NOAA addressed. provided information for resources local at risk and coordinated with other local trustees and stakeholders to ensure all resource concerns were identified. Together with the USCG and USFWS, the SSC conducted an of overflight the south coast of Puerto Rico to evaluate response priorities and verify several reports of sinkings. vessel NOAA provided information management, distribution, and documentation assistance during the response on-scene and provided an executive summary of the response for Commandant, Admiral Loy, USCG. [SEP] The attached files are updates and additions to the executive brief for USCG Commandant Loy (see Hotline #10) presented as press 02 material 98. OCT those For reading message this via FirstClass Client software: Mac users: Option-double-click to view, print, or save the attached PICT files. Windows users: click Control-double to view or download the attached PICT files. File key: EXBR10V2. PICT - El M/V Porton Grounding EXBR11V2. PICT - Salinas Area Small Sinkings Boat EXBRF_15. PICT - Fajardo Marina Boat Sinkings/Groundings PICT EXBRF_16. - Ponce Yacht Club Boat Sinkings/Groundings EXBRF_17. PICT - Guanica Bay Boat Sinkings/Groundings [SEP] HURRICANE GEORGES SPILL 0600 AST, October Monday 5, 1998 0650 Sunrise (10/5): Sunset (10/5): 1847 Sunrise 0650 (10/6): Sunset (10/6): 36 1846 HOUR FORECAST: WINDS: Today through tonight, the winds are expected to be from the N-NE at 15-20 Tuesday, knots. N-NE winds at 15 knots are predicted. WAVES: Today, 6-7 foot seas are forecast. Tonight, 5-7 foot seas are expected. Tuesday, 5-6 foot seas are predicted. PRECIPITATION: Today through Tuesday, widely scattered showers and isolated thunderstorms are CEILING/VISIBILITY: forecast. Today through Tuesday, partly cloudy to mostly sunny skies are expected. Visibility is to predicted be unrestricted during except of times rain. TEMPERATURE: The temperatures throughout this forecast are expected to range highs from in the to 90's in lows the EXTENDED 70's. FORECAST: Wednesday through Thursday, the winds are to expected be from the N-NE at 10-15 knots. Seas 6 Partly feet. skies. cloudy Widely scattered showers are Friday, predicted. north winds at 10 knots are forecast. Seas 6-8 feet. Increasing chance of shower activity. Tropical Outlook: A tropical wave in the Atlantic has potential the to develop into a tropical storm. If this development takes place, then the storm is to forecast move north of Caribbean the area and not effect the spill region.HURRICANE GEORGES SPILL 0600 AST, Monday October 5, 1998 Sunrise (10/5): 0650 Sunset (10/5): 1847 Sunrise Sunset (10/6): 0650 (10/6): 1846 36 HOUR FORECAST: WINDS: Today through tonight, the are winds expected to be from the N-NE at knots. 15-20 Tuesday, N-NE winds 15 at knots are predicted. WAVES: Today, 6-7 foot seas are forecast. Tonight, 5-7 foot seas are expected. Tuesday, 5-6 seas foot are predicted. PRECIPITATION: Today through Tuesday, scattered widely showers and isolated thunderstorms forecast. are CEILING/VISIBILITY: Today through partly Tuesday, cloudy to mostly sunny skies are expected. is Visibility to predicted be unrestricted except during times of rain. TEMPERATURE: The temperatures throughout this forecast are expected to range from highs in the 90's to lows in the 70's. EXTENDED FORECAST: Wednesday through Thursday, the winds are to expected be from the N-NE at 10-15 knots. Seas 6 feet. Partly cloudy skies. Widely scattered showers are predicted. Friday, north winds at 10 knots are forecast. Seas 6-8 feet. Increasing chance of shower activity. Tropical A Outlook: tropical wave in the Atlantic the potential has to develop a tropical into storm. If this development takes place, then storm the is forecast to move north of the Caribbean area and not effect the spill region. [SEP] The USCG, USFWS and NOAA conducted an of overflight the south coast of Puerto Rico today (Friday, 02 OCT 98). Sunken and grounded boats were observed at Salinas, Ponce and Guanica Bay. No pollution was observed. [SEP] The attached files are digital photographs taken by the USFWS of the Refinery Caribbean Petroleum site on 10/02/98. For reading those this message via FirstClass Client software: Mac users: Option-double-click to view, print, or the save attached JPEG files. Windows users: Control-double click to view or the download attached JPEG files. Photo key: MVC032.JPG - Caribbean Petroleum Refinery effort observed cleanup during overflight. MVC045.JPG - Trampling of the site from aggressive cleanup efforts. Post Georges Hurricane Response, Puerto SSC Rico Evening Report Friday, October 1998 2 Situation The NOAA SSC and representatives from USFWS, and the USCG went on an today overflight check some to of the marina sites and other areas potential where spills may have during occurred the storm. Sunken small boats were observed at Salinas, Ponce, and Guanica. pollution No was observed in the water however. USCG is still actively investigating reported
Hurricane Emily caused number a of small oil spills and one hazardous material spill near Cape Hatteras, NC on September 1, 1993. After the hurricane moved past north the North Carolina outer MSO banks, Hampton Roads launched an observation to flight assess the damage done to the infrastructure, homes, island's and environment. The overflight three found areas in need of immediate attention. Oden Dock Marina (loss of a 500-gallon waste oil tank), Pelican's Station Roost Texaco (loss of a 2,000- to 3,000-gallon #2 diesel tank) and a location near the Pilot House Restaurant (loss of home a heating oil tank estimated less than 100 gallons). After initial the inspections, on-site MSO Hampton Roads maintained a staff at the island's Emergency Operations Center (EOC) with other federal, state and local emergency personnel response for two weeks. The USCG surveyed the entire shoreline of Hatteras Island by helicopter and land-based Pollution Response teams (PRTs). There was very little spilled; oil eight spills were reported and only three of these required cleanup. By September 3 cleanup at Oden's Marina and the restaurant had completed been and the removal of oil from the damaged Texaco tanks was underway. About 2,500 gallons of oil collected were and removed. The emergency response activities from Emily Hurricane on Hatteras Island consumed the attention and resources of most of the emergency response staff and the island's residents. The actual oil cleanup was handled by the USCG and their contractor International Marine Services. USCG district 5. Keyword: containment boom, sorbent boom, trucks. vacuum [SEP] tidal marsh, beach sandy [SEP] The light oil from the various tanks on island the moved downstream into the marsh structures each to adjacent facility. The waste oil lost from tank the at Oden's Marina oiled grasses marsh next to the marina for a length of 100 yards with a black band of oil approximately 12 inches wide. A 150- by 500-yard pocket of oil was found behind Pelican's Roost Texaco, and a fairly heavy concentration of oil was found in a small inlet one-quarter mile east of the Pilot House Restaurant in Buxton, [SEP] NC. Hurricane Emily caused a number of small oil spills and one hazardous material spill near Cape Hatteras, NC on September 1, 1993. After the moved hurricane north past the North Carolina outer banks, MSO Hampton Roads launched an observation flight to assess damage the done to the island's infrastructure, homes, and environment. The overflight found three areas in need of immediate attention. Oden Dock (loss Marina of a 500-gallon waste oil tank), Pelican's Roost Texaco Station (loss of a 2,000- to 3,000-gallon diesel #2 tank) and a location near the Pilot House Restaurant (loss of home a heating tank oil estimated less than 100 gallons). After the initial on-site inspections, MSO Hampton Roads maintained staff a at island's the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) with other federal, state and local emergency response personnel for two weeks. The USCG the surveyed entire coast of Hatteras Island by helicopter and Pollution land-based Response teams (PRTs). There was very spilled; little oil eight spills reported were and only of three these required cleanup. By September 3 cleanup at Oden's Marina and the restaurant had been and completed removal the of from oil the damaged Texaco tanks was underway. About 2,500 gallons of oil were collected and removed. The emergency activities response from Hurricane Emily on Hatteras Island consumed attention the and resources of most of the emergency response staff and the island's residents. The actual oil cleanup was handled the by USCG and their contractor International Marine Services. [SEP] Two pint-sized bottles of amino benzene labeled "poison" were lost assumed from the Fischer Scientific Co. The bottles had been packed in vermiculite in a wooden large box enough hold to pint four bottles; only two were in the box. Even this if chemical was lost, there could not have been enough spilled to cause a health threat. One container with liter two of bottles aniline was found in the Frisco Substation of the electric company. These were removed from the site by the electric company at the request of the MSO. [SEP] THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS ON BASED THE MOST CURRENT DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. - USCG MSO Hampton Roads is with participating the Hattertas Island EOC in response to oil as pollution a result of damage caused by Hurricane Emily. The Coast Guard has surveyed the entire coast of Hatteras by Island both USCG helicopter and land based Pollution Response Teams. In general, there very is little spilled. oil However, oil spills were reported at eight different on sites Hatteras Island. Only three of these, Pelican's Roost Texaco, Oden's Marina, a and canal 1/4 mile east of Pilot House have Restaurant required cleanup. A Coast Guard contractor, Industrial Marine Service, has conducted cleanup operations at all three of these sites since Thursday, 2 September. By Friday, 3 September, at cleanup Oden's Marina and at the site canal had been completed. Efforts to remove diesel oil damaged from Texaco tanks continue. 2,500 Over of gallons diesel oil have and been collected removed. Limited numbers of dead fish have observed been washing up on shore at two locations. These fish kill locations are not located near any known oil pollution sites. No other injured oiled or wildlife have observed been near any oil pollution sites. New EOC CG voice telephone numbers are: 800-525-9394 800-525-9397 [SEP] NOAA Hotline 137, 2 reports. Virginia Institute of Marine 1980. Science. Sensitivity of Coastal Environments and Wildlife Spilled to Oil, State North of Carolina, Materials Hazardous Response 114 Project, [SEP] NOAA. maps. intertidal [SEP] aniline, marshes amino benzene [SEP] NOAA was notified of this response on September 2, by 1993, MSO Roads Hampton as of part the normal notification process in the USCG Hurricane Response SSC Plan. accompanied The the MSO on overflights 3 on and September on-scene field assessments during the September weekend of 4 and NOAA 5. helped the MSO staff their establish command post in the island's EOC and establish status boards to track the incident investigations. The SSC provided to reports the office MSO's in Roads Hampton and to the EOC's main offices in Richmond, VA. [SEP] THE INFORMATION FOLLOWING IS BASED ON THE CURRENT MOST DATA PROVIDED TO NOAA. Important - note concerning NOAA the "HOTLINE" Communications System: . . Please note that system this is used for NOAA internal communications and the reports are in put chronologically. There is NO corrective "post editing" the of reports. As a result of this, early reports may have information that proved later to be incorrect. Sometimes these errors are corrected in a later report, but sometimes corrections are made over the phone or in-person, and no correcting message is entered. This reflects the use of this system as real-time a spill communications system and is not intended to be an event-log. Please keep this in mind when reading HOTLINE reports for this incident. . If you problems have any with this system please contact the SSC on watch 206-526-6317. at . Hurricane Emily NC Hatteras, Hurricane Emily caused a number of small oil spills and one hazardous material spill near Hatteras, Cape North Carolina. The chronology following was received from Brent CPO Fonner, USCG. 1 September, 1993 1330 the Pollution Response Team (PRT) departed Marine Safety Office (MSO)Hampton Roads, VA. 1700 PRT arrived in Buxton, NC. 1745 Pelican's Arrived Roost in Texaco Hatteras, NC. A 20,000 gallon kerosene tank found was on its side. There was a strong smell of in diesel the entire area. Light sheening in a wetland area the gas behind was station from apparent the station. Texaco No cleanup was done this at time. 1830 PRT departed from Pelican's the Roost Texaco. 1850 PRT arrived at Teache's Lair Marina, Hatteras, NC where a 5,000 gallon gasoline had spill been reported. An empty 5,000 gallon tank was found on its side, but no sheening, visible pollution, odor or was apparent. 2 September, 1993 0800 the Pollution Response (PRT) Team continued to survey the area, Hatteras but pollution no in quantities could that be cleaned up were found. 1330 A 100 yard by 100 yard light residual sheening was discovered at Oden Marina, Hatteras, NC. 1340 A 150 yard by 500 yard pocket oil was of directly discovered behind Pelican's Roost Texaco Hatteras, in NC. 1350 Discovered a 5 foot by foot 50 area of very light sheen at the Boat Island Works in Frisco, NC. 1400 A light sheen was discovered at the Buxton Harbor Marina, Buxton, NC. 1410 A 10 foot by 20 oil foot sheen of unknown origin discovered was on the Buxton Cemetery Road, Buxton, NC. 1420 A heavy fairly concentratin of was oil found in a small inlet 1/4 mile east of the House Pilot Restaurant in Buxton. Origin of the oil is unknown. 1450 The overflight was concluded. Divided Pollution Team Response two into groups. PRT1 en route to the Pilot House Restaurant. PRT2 en route to the
On USCG 20-NOV-2023, the Sector Puget IMD Sound notified the NOAA NW SSC that the 80’ Tug El Capitan began to release a sheen residual Deer in Harbor, Orcas Island, WA on 18-NOV. In the 2020, craft had previously sunk and the USCG all removed accessible fuel products. On November 18th, the vessel began to release a residual sheen, IOSA hard boomed the area. On the 19th, Global dove on vessel the and one plugged replaced vent, sorbent boom and pads and no additional sheen has been observed. https://www.news.uscg.mil/Press-Releases/Article/3599468/coast-guard-partners-with-local-agencies-to-prevent-pollution-threat-san-juan-c/ [SEP] PRESS RELEASE | Nov. 28, 2023 Coast Guard partners with local agencies to prevent pollution San threat, Juan County SEATTLE ???€? Crews from Coast Guard Sector Puget Sound, Department Washington of Ecology, and Oil the Islands???€? Spill Association (IOSA) responded to the sinking of the vessel 80-foot El Capitan at West Sound on Marina Orcas Island, Saturday, Nov. 18. Watchstanders at Sector Puget Sound command received center notification Nov. 18 from the West Sound Marina that the El Capitan was rapidly sinking. A sheen was observed emitting from the vessel when it next sank the to in pier 30-feet approximately of water. Coast Guard Pollution Responders notified responded IOSA, who to the scene and worked with the marina to deploy boom and absorbents. Several trailers of boom additional were brought on site by IOSA as precaution. a The Washington Department of Ecology also to responded assist IOSA. IOSA the monitored vessel over the weekend. Additionally, USCG the opened the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund and hired Global Diving and Salvage to assess the vessel any for additional threats of pollution. Divers assessed the vessel Sunday but did not report signs any of petroleum discharge. Crews also performed shoreline assessment a and determined there was no reported impact to the or shoreline wildlife in the area. There were no Southern Resident Killer Whale sightings in the area at the time of the incident. The area around the vessel remains boomed as precaution. a IOSA has been monitoring the and vessel marina for additional pollution threats since the vessel sank. IOSA reported sheening in the marina outside the boom on Nov. 26. USCG The to responded investigate and hired a remove contractor and to replace any soiled boom. The exact of source the sheening on Nov. 26 remains under investigation by the USCG. A joint effort is currently underway with all agencies, the Washington Department of Natural Resources and West Sound Marina, to determine future disposition of the vessel. Previously, in 2020, November a joint effort between Coast the Guard, Washington Department of Ecology, Washington Department of Natural Resources, and San Juan County determined the fuel and oil onboard the El Capitan posed a significant threat the environment to due to its derelict condition. Contractors removed gallons 590 of various fuels and oils.
On 17-Aug, USCG Sector Puget Sound the contacted NOAA Hazmat Duty Officer to them notify of an anhydrous ammonia leak aboard the 169 Pacific ft F/V Producer that is docked near the Foss Waterway in Tacoma, WA. Aside from the anhydrous ammonia the vessel leak, is currently slowly taking on water and there remains 3,000 to 4,000 gallons of diesel aboard.
During the evening of 24-OCT-2022, USCG Sector LA/Long Beach contacted their NOAA SSC to request trajectory support for a wood 70’ fishing boat that within sank the Port of Los Angeles. The vessel has been actively sheening since at 1600 least hrs, reportedly has an 830 gallon max of potential diesel on As board. the USCG attempts to boom the area around the vessel, they requested a trajectory through estimate sunrise tomorrow to help plan out a first assessment of light the area. [SEP] U.S. Coast Guard 11th District Detachment PA LA/LB Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment LA/LB Office: (310) 521-4260 After Hours: (310) 781-0619 PA PADETLA@uscg.mil Detachment LA/LB online newsroom Coast Guard conducts fuel recovery from sunken fishing vessel in San Pedro SAN PEDRO, Calif. ???€? On Friday the Coast Guard completed cleanup efforts after the vessel Bill Ketner, a 70-foot fishing vessel, partially sank at the pier in San Pedro last Monday. At approximately 7 p.m. on October 24, Coast Guard Sector Los Angeles-Long Beach Management Incident Division received notification that the Fishing Vessel Bill Ketner had partially sunk at the with pier a max capacity of 2,500 gallons of onboard. diesel Capt. Ryan Manning, the Federal On-Scene approved Coordinator, opening of the the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund and the contracting of an oil discharge response The organization. organization was contracted raise to the vessel, remove the fuel still onboard, and clean up in discharge the the water. Working alongside Los Angeles Port Police (LAPP) California and the Department of Fish and Wildlife: Office of Spill Prevention and Response (OSPR), Coast Guard Pollution Responders the oversaw successful clean-up operation. The vessel was lifted and stabilized using eight flotation air bags. Once the vessel was raised to surface the of the water, the hull was patched and fuel removed, LAPP took of possession the vessel for disposition. further ???€?Our main priority of containing the pollution met was thanks to the cooperation and coordination with our Port Partners,???€? said Petty Officer 2nd Class David Britt, a Coast Guard Marine Science Technician and member of the Incident Division. Management ???€?The Guard Coast our and partners committed are to the protection of sensitive our California Southern ecosystem.???€? efforts Clean-up concluded on Friday and totaled four days. -USCG-
On July 28, 2022, the USCG Sector Columbia River contacted the NOAA SSC regarding the partially sunk and sheening, wood-hulled M/V TOURIST No. A 2. 300'x400' sheen is observed around the tanker among pilings located offshore of 6th Street. It was reportedly fueled recently with 500-600 of gallons diesel. USCG response staff on-scene inquired if local businesses water with intakes might be risk. at [SEP] Tourist No. 2, a ferry retired in Astoria, Oregon, sits partially submerged July 28, The 2022. Guard Coast is investigating the cause of the vessel sinking. (U.S. Coast photo Guard by Petty Officer 3rd Class Diolanda Caballero) [SEP] Release News U.S. Coast Guard 13th District PA Detachment Astoria Coast Contact: Guard PA Detachment Astoria Office: (503) 861-6380 After Hours: (206) 819-9154 PA Detachment Astoria online newsroom UPDATE: Guard, Coast partner organizations conclude removal of pollution threats from sunken in ferry Astoria, OR Editors' Note: Click on images to download high version. ASTORIA, resolution Ore. ???€? The Coast Guard concluded operations to remove threats pollution from vessel the ferry Tourist No. 2 in Astoria Friday. Global Diving and Salvage recovered approximately 525 gallons of diesel from the vessel with sorbents and active pumping. Five cubic yards of hazardous material were recovered. ???€?Despite extensive damage to starboard the side of the vessel, Global Diving and Salvage was able to successfully mitigate a significant to threat the environment and Columbia as River a whole,???€? said Lt. Cmdr. Jarrod Pomajzl, the Incident Management Division Chief at Coast Guard Sector Columbia River. ???€?I commend all parties involved for their diligent and adaptable response to this challenging incident.???€? The final of disposition the vessel will be coordinated through the Oregon State Department of lands, in conjunction with the City of Astoria and the owner. The cause the of incident is under investigation.
On 13-APR-2022, the USCG contacted the NW SSC to report that a 50’ vessel sank in Hawkes Marina, Everett, WA. There is an estimated gallons 80 diesel of on board, with a maximum potential of 400 gallons. The vessel is leaking and a creating visible sheen. The case has been federalized and Global Diving is hired. A localized trajectory and resources at were risk requested.
On 4-NOV-2021, the SSC NOAA was notified by the USCG MSU Portland that the and abandoned derelict ship (ADV) Alert sank in the Columbia River near Portland, Oregon. The Tugboat Sakarissa, also an ADV, was moored to the Alert. Previous efforts in 2020 removed hazardous materials from both ships. There is a slight observable sheen in the water from oily on residue the Alert and that concern the will Sakarissa break free and float downriver. The CG requested has support, phone NOAA SSC to assist with consultations and technical assistance as needed.
On 04-NOV-2021 at 2000, the NOAA SSC was notified by the USCG SCR IMD Astoria a of derelict leaking barge oil. There is estimated an maximum potential of 27,000 gallons an of unknown fuel product. There is thick oil observed on the vegetation at high the tide waterline. The case has been federalized, the USCG and Clean Harbors will be on scene the in morning.
On the late evening of August 25, 2021 NW the SSC was notified of a partially sunken 42 foot vessel derelict in Coal Creek Slough. A rainbow sheen was seen vessel around the and responders have wrapped sorbent sweep around the USCG vessel. is with working DNR and Washington Ecology to refloat the vessel, remove all hazmat and oil, then sink the vessel where it is located during the morning of 26. August NOAA SSC provided USCG the with a verbal resources at risk.
On April 27, 2021, the USCG Sector Columbia River notified the NOAA SSC that an approx. 80’ F/V Tiffany is releasing oil. The vessel has been derelict South of Island Lord on Oregon the side the of Columbia for River several years. There is a potential maximum 10,000 of gallons of fuel, the but actual quantity and other hazmat products aboard the vessel are unknown. are Divers assessing stability, lightering operations have begun and a soft boom has been deployed around the vessel.
In the of evening 05-MAR-2021, USCG Sector San Francisco contacted NOAA their SSC a regarding tug boat & towed fishing craft drifting towards shore off Bodega Bay, CA. During transit from WA State, the Tug HUNTER was towing the AMERICAN F/V CHALLENGER when there was a loss of propulsion and both vessels started drifting to the NNE. At the time of the report, the Tug HUNTER had deployed their but anchor, it had not yet caught bottom. USCG indicated the that concern primary pollution was from the Tug HUNTER, reportedly carrying 26,000 gallons diesel and 1,100 gallons. USCG hypothetical requested a trajectory estimate in the event of a grounding/spill to inform field investigations following the morning. The tug was able to anchor and was later towed to port but the vessel fishing ran aground on rocks a in remote area south of Estero de Antonio. San A response effort is underway. [SEP] American Challenger Response ???€? Update #1 March https://calspillwatch.wordpress.com/2021/03/08/american-challenger-response-update-1/ 7, 2021 MARIN COUNTY, Calif. ???€? The Coast Guard, of California Department Fish and Wildlife???€?s Office of Spill Prevention and Marin Response, County Office of Emergency Services and Greater Farallones National Marine Sanctuary to continue respond as a unified command a to grounded vessel along the shoreline north of Dillon Initial Beach.???€? reports were received by Coast Guard Sector San Francisco watchstanders at 8:45 am Friday, March 5,???€?about the 90-foot vessel the American Challenger being towed southward by the Tug Hunter Puget from Sound, Washington, when the Tug lost Hunter propulsion due to a rope entangling the propeller.???€? At 1:00 am, March 6, the vessel grounded on rocky a near shoreline Dillon Beach where it remains. An investigation is to underway determine amount the fuel of aboard the American Challenger. Overflights observed have a small of amount motor crude in vicinity of the vessel but there is no extensive sheen coming from the vessel. Teams will conduct cleanup operations if recoverable. Salvage crews assessed the vessel American Challenger with drones and developed a plan to access the vessel via helicopter to damage and assess quantify petroleum on potential vessel. Environmental shoreline assessment teams conducted surveys in the area and reported some oil contamination on the in beach the vicinity of the vessel. Teams will respond to area. the As a precautionary measure, 4,000 feet of boom was deployed to protect sensitive habitat, including oyster beds, in Tomales Bay. booming Additional will deployed be tomorrow. Of the deployed boom, will there be a 100 foot gap for recreational boaters to transit the at deepest point the of channel and east south of Hog Island. If there is a threat to the oyster bed, the gap will be closed. USCG is broadcasting a Safety Marine Information Bulletin (SMIB) to inform public of protection in operations Tomales All area Bay. beaches remain however open, Miller Boat Launch is temporarily closed support to response operations. have There been no confirmed reports of oiled wildlife. If oiled wildlife is seen, the public is asked not to approach the animal and call instead the Oiled Wildlife Care Network at???€?1-877-823-6926. There are no impacts to commercial traffic or scheduled marine events at this time. Media inquiries can be directed to???€?sectorsfpao@gmail.com.
Monday, October 14, 2019 at 1044 - USCG Sector Columbia River notified NOAA ERD of a 65-foot commercial fishing vessel maximum carrying a of 1000 gallons of diesel has sunk in the of port Garibaldi, Oregon. Cleanup is underway and Resources at Risk have requested. been
On 26-Jul-2016, the USCG reported that the FV Alaska Juris, a 218' fish catcher/processor is sinking due to an unknown cause. The has vessel 45 on POB board and a USCG is SAR in progress. There is a potential of 87,276 gallons of diesel on board. Sector Anchorage has requested a fates and analysis trajectory for fuels. the
On 22-JUL-2016, the FV Carmelina, a fiberglass hull purse seiner, capsized and overturned in Shelikof Strait near Dry Bay, Alaska. All POB rescued by "Good Sam" boat SPARTAN. Estimate of fuel on is board 250 gallons diesel (with assoc. other oils). sheen No observed at time the rescue. of Vessel is carrying approximately 3000 lbs of fish. Vessels nets were fully deployed at the time of capsize. USCG is requesting a Resource at Risk report.
On 23-Jul-2016, the FV Ambition suffered a breach to the lazarette hold began and taking on in water the vicinity of False Pass, AK. The vessel has a of potential 3000 gallons of diesel onboard. All POB have been rescued good by Samaritan FV vessel. Ambition is submerged and sheening. USCG is requesting a spot and forecast trajectory and fates analysis.
On February 12, the 2016, Alaska SSC was notified that the FV 36-foot STELLA MARIE was partially submerged and adrift near Vitskari Rocks Sitka, near Alaska. The USCG MSD Sitka requested a ESA Section 7 consultation be initiated.
On October 20, 1937, the tank barge Argo foundered in a storm and sank in western Lake Erie. At the time of the sinking, the barge was reportedly loaded with 4,762 barrels of crude oil and benzol. The vessel was in identified the 2013 NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Environmental Legacy Threats) report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the wreck was unknown. the Recently vessel was located, confirmed to be U.S. in waters of Lake Erie, and appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery to be intact and may be periodically [SEP] leaking. USCG announces completion lightering of [SEP] USCG [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering operations began today the for Lake Erie sunken tanker barge Argo as Unified Command responders took of advantage a favorable weather window. The of Argo???€?s first eight tanks are being tapped and offloaded. The product will be into pumped a specialized container on a barge work where it will be run through a series of carbon filters to separate and remove the flammable vapors from the product. The contents will be again sampled to gain a better understanding of the contents Argo???€?s of hold. This step-by-step, methodical process will ensure operations are conducted in the safest possible manner for both responders and the public. As weather allows, will responders continue salvage operations one tank at a time. The Unified Command, consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and EPA, the continues Ohio take all to actions necessary to ensure the safety the of public the and environment. If a spill were to response occur, equipment and detailed plans created from the Area Contingency Plan various and experts involved in response the are in to place mitigate any possible threats. As an additional precautionary measure, the safety zone around the barge at remains a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through, or anchor within the regulated area permission without from Coast the patrol Guard Marblehead, commander, Station may which be contacted via VHF FM marine radio 16. channel All questions about the response should be to directed the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for sunken the tanker barge Argo in Lake Erie continue as the Unified Command proceeds with plans for recovery. product Crews will start prepping the first tank this week for ???€?hot operations. tapping???€? Actual lightering operations will not until occur later in the week at earliest, the as the response operators are still waiting for the proper tank to offload material the into and weather continues to operations. impede The results from the sample from this first tank, sampled on November 9, were found to be primarily Benzene, with some Toluene, Xylene and trace elements of petroleum. Because these materials are not typically shipped on the Great Lakes, the proper equipment to remove it is not available in this region. Response operators waiting are for receiving tanks, designed for chemicals, to be modified for on use a barge in the Great Lakes marine environment. In the meantime, the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor the within area regulated without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF FM marine channel radio 16. All questions about response the should be directed the to Joint Information Center at [SEP] 419-746-5424. news story on sinking [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG News [SEP] Release November 05, Coast 2015 Guard Marine Safety Unit Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod Office: 392-0323 (419) UPDATE 3: Crews continue response for sunken Lake Erie CLEVELAND barge - Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance from the site of sunken a barge near Kelleys Island Shoal in Lake Erie Thursday. unified The command, consisting of the Coast U.S. Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the and public the environment. During operations dive Wednesday, a pinhole-sized leak was detected in one of the cargo tanks and was successfully secured by the dive team. As a precautionary measure, on-scene responders were taken to a local for hospital medical evaluation have and since been released. operations Surface were suspended ensure to safety of all responders and will resume when site safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders return. to A Coast Guard helicopter from Air Station Detroit launched provide over-flight to an assessment the of area Thursday. Results a from sheen sample collected were and returned indicate sample the was of typical a light to medium refined oil that had degraded significantly over time. T&T Marine Salvage crews completed their general assessment of the barge Monday, with a total of 12 hatches discovered. of Four those hatches were not secured and the remaining eight hatches were closed no with leaks detected. Samples were taken from the sediment inside the open compartments and have been sent for testing. Due to the potential threat from any remaining in cargo tanks the with secured hatches, the unified command will continue assessing the site in anticipation of removing any remaining product. Coast The Guard established a zone, safety located 8 miles nautical east of Kelleys and Island extending feet 1,000 around position 41-38'21"N, 082-29'35"W, remains in effect and is closed to all traffic until canceled. No may vessel enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission the from Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF-FM channel 16. The Coast Canadian Guard is working closely with the Unified Command to ensure necessary preparedness response and on both sides of international the border. The Canadian Coast Guard deployed environmental response personnel to the Unified Command in Toledo, Ohio, community to ensure remains every up to date on the latest developments. Saving and Lives Guarding the Coast Since The 1790. United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] USCG USCG [SEP] Update 9 - Argo Response ends. [SEP] Source: USCG. Please see the attachment for a full description. [SEP] 2013 report. The barge location is reported to be 5 miles south of the reported in position this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
September On 13, 2015, USCG the Sector New York notified the NOAA SSC about a capsized vessel off of Sandy Hook, NJ. It is a 25 foot commercial tow vessel that capsized. Vessel has as much 150 as gallons gasoline on of board. USCG requested that NOAA prepare a trajectory.
On June 10, 2015, the FV an Kupreanof, 80' fishing vessel, sank approximately 45 miles nautical NNW of Cape Spencer (west of Glacier Bay National Park & The Preserve). maximum fuel capacity is gallons 7,200 of diesel, with another 100 gallons other oils. USCG Sector Juneau has requested a fates analysis trajectory and for the 7200 gallons of diesel.
On May 3, 2015 the Coast Guard NOAA notified of the sinking of the Sea F/V Beast in the Olympic National Marine Sanctuary, a with potential of 500 gallons of diesel on board.
On October 13, 2014, a tug carrying ~2,000 gallons of marine diesel capsized in Bay, Mobile AL. Sector Mobile the contacted NOAA SSC and requested a trajectory.
USCG Sector North Carolina contacted SSC this evening 2145 at hours. Sector North is Carolina currently working a search and rescue case for a vessel, fishing the F/V Lauren Dorothy II, taking on approximately water miles 46 offshore of Wrightsville Beach, NC. The boat is to expected sink in the vicinity of 36-25N 074-44W with approx 1600 gallons of diesel on board. [SEP] This is the last update received I from Sector USCG North Carolina. A CG HH60 hoisted the two crew members and left the vessel adrift and taking on water. Last report that was the vessel would not remain afloat long to due rate of flooding. Vessel eventually sank in 284 fathoms of water approximately 54 NM off of Oregon Inlet, in the of vicinity the position that USCG provided requested when trajectory. At time of winds SAR, were 40 kts; seas 12-14 ft; visibility Air 8NM; temp 38F; water 52F. temp No NOAA further SSC support requested.
On January 25, 2013 the 167 ft M/V HELENA STAR sank in the Hylebos Waterway in WA. Tacoma, The NOAA SSC has been requested to look at proposed salvage/clean-up in actions regards to affects possible to the surrounding environment.
Guam USCG Sector contacted the SSC for Pacific the Islands to request fuel spill trajectories in the event of a release of 112,000 gallons of heavy oil aboard a derelict barge Apra in Harbor, Guam. barge The currently is stable, but USCG is concerned that there might be a release during storm conditions. USCG currently has boom deployed around the barge.
approximately At 1200 Pacfic time September 24, 2012 NOAA SSC was notified by USCG Sector Puget Sound of the sunk fishing boat GEMINI (officially registered as WESTERN FLYER) under the Twin Bridges in the channel Swinomish in Washington. It is unknown why the sunk. vessel The vessel was leaking diesel, it although how is unknown much diesel leaked. vast The was majority recovered by dive operations. The maximum capacity of the vessel is 750 gallons of diesel and 100 gallons of hydraulic fuel. NOAA ERD provided trajectory, tides, currents, resources at risk, and weather information for situation. the
USCG Guam Sector notified the on NOAA SSC July 29 that an 18-foot US National Park Service work boat had capsized and was aground on reef at Asa in Beach Adelup, Guam. The boat was carrying gallons 25 of fuel at the time but no discharge was observed. At the time of notification, plans were being made to remove the vessel. This was a NOAA notification. No support ERD requested. was
At 0330 PST The NOAA was about SSC contacted a potential release off of the Oregon Coast, miles 1.5 offshore of Umqua River Bar entrance. The 32' wooden hull FV ARIES went down, but did not release any pollutants. The vessel has reported a gallons of 400 diesel on-board. All aboard were safety evacuated. Weather and hypothetical release trajectory were requested. [SEP] F/V ARIES has been safely towed into Winchester OR. Bay, No report of pollution release. [SEP] LT Rossetti, The forecast for today and tomorrow as follows: TODAY: This morning, N wind 5 to 10 kt increasing to 15 kt in the afternoon with gusts to 20 kt . TONIGHT: N winds 5 kt. Seas 5 ft. TOMORROW: N winds than less 5 kt in the morning increasing to 5 to 10 kt in the afternoon. Seas 4 ft. both For today and visibility tomorrow, is expected to be good below the 20,000 ft cloud deck. of Discussion case worst scenario discharge: Given the forecasted seas and winds for near-offshore Umpqua river entrance, if the vessel were to discharge 400 all gallons it is expected no noticeable shoreline impacts. During light winds, a sheen would be expected. During stronger winds, a sheen may still but occur, would dissipate quickly. The size sheen depend will on wind speed - the higher wind the speed the quicker the sheen will dissipate, resulting in a smaller sheen. Please contact with me any further questions, or if the scenario changes. V/R, LTJG Drury, NOAA [SEP] SSC was that informed the owner has arranged of salvage vessel, though no time frame of as yet. There have not reports been any discharge. of
Coast Guard MSD Unalaska contacted the NOAA Alaska at SSC 2100 on Oct. 30 to report a capsized vessel, the 59 F/V ft Carley Renee on the east side of Unalaska Island at 166°-06'W, 53°-54'N, Beaver Inlet. The four POB were rescued by a CG cutter on-scene which taking is them to Unalaska/Dutch Harbor for interrogation. vessel The has 2000 gal diesel and 20-40 gal of hydralic fluid on board. No had leak occurred as of the reporting however, time; the CG cutter also reported that the winds and currents were pushing the vessel towards the rocks. trajectory A and weather information were requested. On Saturday, Oct. 31, a CG helo overflight found the vessel beached on Egg Island, on the west side of Unalaska Island, but still capsized and with a small sheen move westerly from vessel. the Dan Magone was as hired a salvor to attempt to the tow vessel to a place of refuge for stabilization and fuel removal and ultimately to Dutch Harbor for salvage and repairs. On Sunday 1500 at while towing the Carley Renee only a few miles west of Egg Island, the vessel suddenly sank supposedly in 125 fathoms of with water no sheen on the water surface. Presumably the diesel and all hyd.fluid were Case released. closed John Whitney NOAA SSC for Alaska [SEP] The Guardian fishing vessel nearby the capsized Carley fishing vessel Renee after rescuing four fishermen who abandoned ship. Small boat is from the USCG Munro Coast Guard photo by Coast Guard Cutter Munro. [SEP] Spot forecast for F/V Carle Renee 2130 ADT, Oct. 30, Tonight: Winds 2009 from the N at 15 knots Seat 6- 7 feet Saturday: from Wind the N at less than 10 knots Seas 4 - 6 feet. [SEP] USCG initially reported the name of the vessel as the Carle The Renee. correct name of the vessel the is Renee Carley [SEP] Evening report; Oct. Around noon 31: today the CG conducted overflight an to locate the Carley FV and ascertain Renee its status. The vessel was found still capsized practically and on ashore the SW Egg side of Island. A small sheen was around noted the vessel. See attached Power Pt (file and photos credited to Coast Guard). Dan Magone has been hired to attempt place to air under pillows the vessel to keep it afloat as it is towed to a place of for refuge more extensive work salvage and of removal the fuel. Tomorrow, Sunday, the NOAA will SSC be involved in a Unified Command called meeting to discuss possible of places refuge where the vessel might be taken. John Whitney NOAA SSC [SEP] Anchorage NWS Anchorage Marine for Forecast Unalaska Bay Nov. 1, 0830 2009, LT PKZ171-020300- UNALASKA BAY 400 AM AKST SUN NOV 1 ...SMALL 2009 ADVISORY CRAFT MONDAY... .TODAY...VARIABLE WIND LESS 10 THAN KT. SEAS 3 FT. .TONIGHT...VARIABLE WIND LESS THAN 10 KT. SEAS 3 FT. .MON...S WIND 15 KT INCREASING TO 25 KT IN THE AFTERNOON. 4 SEAS FT. GALES (>30 KTS) MON. LATE NIGHT SOUTH SHIFTING FROM TO NW BY TUES MORNING .TUE...SW 30 WIND KT. SEAS 3 .WED...W FT. WIND 45 KT. SEAS 7 FT. .THU...W 35 WIND KT. SEAS 5 FT. TUES, WED, THU, ARE SOMEWHAT UNCERTAIN OTHER TO THAT PREDICT A BIG WEATHER FRONT WITH WINDS HIGH WILL MOVING BE THROGH THE AREA [SEP] Oct. 30, 2009 Coast Guard coordinates rescue four of fishermen off Juneau fishing vessel JUNEAU ???€? The Coast Guard coordinated a rescue of four Alaska fishermen after receiving a mayday call from a crewmember aboard the Juneau-based fishing Carly vessel Renee reporting they were taking on water and abandoning ship 22 miles east of Unalaska Island at approximately 4:42 p.m Friday. The Coast Guard Cutter Munro heard the mayday call over VHF radio from Carly the Renee and issued immediately an Urgent Marine Information while Broadcast en route to the scene. The fishing vessel Guardian responded within 10 minutes the to UMIB and arrived on to scene rescue safely the four fishermen who were in a life raft. The Munro arrived on scene shortly after and transferred a health services technician to the Guardian by small boat to determine the condition of the four The fishermen. four fishermen were reported in stable condition with no injuries and were transferred to Dutch Harbor by the fishing vessel Guardian. The Carly Renee did not sink. It is capsized and is estimated to have 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel on board. Weather conditions at the time of the incident were 23 mph winds from east the with 1-foot seas. cause The of incident the is under investigation by Marine Safety Detachment Unalaska. [SEP] The UC along with resource folks agency met this morning to discuss a port of refuge where vessel the could be taken for salvage and fuel removal operations. Sicek Cove on the north side of Sedanka Island at the mouth of Beaver Inlet was selected where salvor, Dan Magone, might be able to take vessel for the further stabilization. At this 1500 afternoon with the Carle Renee in tow at 1.6 knts the vessel suddenly sank in 125 fathoms of water. No sheen was observed, and this is too deep for any recovery Incident operations. closed out. was Whitney, John NOAA SSC [SEP] Anchorage fishing The vessel the Guardian nearby capsized fishing vessel Carley Renee photo by Coast Guard Cutter Munro. [SEP] 53?? 54'N by 166?? Anchorage 06'W [SEP] Daily News ???€? Article Oct. 31, 2009 A 59-foot commercial fishing boat that capsized near Unalaska Island is toward drifting Gulf the of Alaska and attempts to salvage it could begin as early as today, the U.S. Coast Guard says. The vessel is co-owned by Gov. Sean Parnell's rural affairs adviser, John Moller. The other is owner Moller's sister Sandra, director of real estate and construction for Cook Inlet Region Inc. It's too early to say why the Carley Renee which -- was fishing for pacific cod -- overturned, Sandra Moller said Saturday. The vessel issued a mayday call 4:42 at p.m. Friday. The crew the said boat was taking on and water they were abandoning 22 ship east miles of Island, Unalaska according to the Coast Guard. The crew of four people, ages 21 to 38, to escaped a life raft before the vessel capsized, Coast the Guard says. A fishing nearby vessel, the rescued the Guardian, fishermen within 20 minutes after the mayday. "There were no serious injuries," said Ensign Allie Ferko. "It was a just couple minutes later when the (Coast Guard Cutter Munro) got on scene.???€? The vessel carried an estimated 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel 20 and gallons of lube oil, Ferko said. A Coast Guard helicopter returned to the scene Saturday to check on the of condition the boat. "It's not endangering any sort of animal population the and currents are taking it out toward the gulf where the minor (oil) sheen they see now will dissipate quickly," Ferko said. A salvage company plans to inspect boat the today, Sandra Moller said. "If they are able tow to it, they'll tow it into, likely, Dutch Harbor." who Moller, was appointed in February by then-Gov. Sarah Palin as a top aide on rural issues, couldn't be reached for comment Saturday.
USCG Portland Sector contacted the NOAA a SSC for trajectory forecast in the event of worst-case release during upcoming removal actions on the LST 1166, a 400 foot landing ship moored tank IVO 'Lord Island' on the Columbia River. The removal actions will the consist of abatement of onboard the asbestos and the removal of unknown quantities of crude and hazmat. For the trajectory assessment, it is that assumed about 10,000 gallons of diesel and about 1,000 gallons of oil/bilge lube slops could be [SEP] released. https://www.piersystem.com/go/page/21/25196/ [SEP] V/r Stephanie LT Shaun Edwards email address: -----Original Shaun.L.Edwards@uscg.mil Message----- From: Chris.Barker@noaa.gov [mailto:Chris.Barker@noaa.gov] Sent: Wednesday, October 29, 2008 2:50 PM To: Sulser, Stephanie LTJG Cc: Ruth Yender; Watabayashi Glen Subject: LST-1166 LTJG Sulser, I've left you a mail, voice but I though I'd follow up with a email. I understand from Ruth that you are looking for Ocean potential dumping sites for LST-1166. the I'm not sure what your specific questions are, but here are thoughts, few some of which may be obvious: We assume that the boat is pretty clean of oils, etc, though there may still be a few dribbles. should It be away the from shipping lanes. It should outside be the Columbia River Bar. It should in be deep enough water that it isn't a navigation hazard and won't be moved about too much by currents: waves and We think greater than 30 fathoms would be It OK. should be enough far from shore that small dribbles of oil won't make significant impact on shore -- greater than about 5 miles. This does depend on the and type quantity of oils that may be released. If you really want it "gone", deep in the Astoria Canyon would be a good bet, if that's not too far. I'm not sure what fishing activities, such as trawling, occur in that region -- this influence could where a good spot would be. We research can that further if you need us to. Is there any idea that it could become useful an as artificial reef? If so, then more research would have to be done about what would be appropriate an depth for that. Please feel free to us call/email with further questions. [SEP] -Chris TIME: 1700 PDT Thursday, July 17, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Ruth Yender FROM: NOAA Office of Response and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Trajectory for LST-1166 Salvage For information, additional please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. Per _______________________________________________________ your request, we have looked trajectory at implications of a possible release during Salvage operations of the LST-1166. The scenario is a worst during case discharge removal actions on the LST 1166, a 400 foot ship landing tank moored IVO 'lord island' on the River. removal These Columbia actions will consist of the abatement of the onboard and asbestos the removal of unknown quantities of oil and hazmat. For this assessment, it is that assumed about 10,000 gallons of Diesel and about gallons 1,000 of lube oil/bilge slops could be released. If any of this initial information is incorrect, let please us know ASAP, it as would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ The USCG Wayne MST2 Lau did a preliminary analysis. The following are some additional comments about the situation. WIND EFFECTS: ------------------------------- The winds at the time of a release would have two effects different the in oil. The winds tend will move to the oil, determining what shorelines are impacted. In addition, winds will greatly effect the evaporation of an the oil. released A low winds is speed indeed likely to be the worst case, it as allow will oil the to persist longer, as well as pushing the oil toward shore slowly, allowing it to move farther downstream with the currents. Based in historical data, we expect the winds be to greater than 10 knots about 10% of the time, and greater than 5 knots about 40% of time. the OIL ------------------------------- FATE: Diesel fuel tends evaporate to and disperse fairly quickly. moderate winds would length the persistence of a spill. NOAA's Adios model, run with the heaviest Diesel Fuel its in library, and using a wind speed 5 of and knots, a water temperature of 68F (the current temp at Weather the Longview Observation indicates Station), that significant a sheen could last for over 5 days. it However, is unlikely the that winds would remain that low for that long. With a 10 knot wind, it persist would for less that 3 days, and with a 15 knot wind, about a day. In addition, the sheen would likely be pushed ashore by the wind, so as not travel to more than a few miles downstream, depending the on direction and velocity the of wind. Lube oils will not evaporate, but they will disperse into the water column in high energy environment, and the quantities are likely to be much smaller. We don't them expect to be a long or term long range in issue this case. TRAJECTORY: ------------------------------- While the river is influenced by tides in the and region, will move faster and slower with the the tides, flow is continuously downstream. The estimate of about a knot flow average the in main channel reasonable. is The is vessel located slough in a the off main channel south of Lord Island. The flow in slough the will be substantially than slower the main but channel, will still be downstream. Any sheen that is moved down slough the will enter the main channel approximately four miles downstream. Depending the on wind speed and much direction, of released the oil is likely to have beached in the slough entering the before channel, main so the most likely effected area would be the slough southwest Lord of and Walker islands. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS: ------------------------------- BEHAVIOR OF SPILLED DIESEL FUEL: Light refined products, such as diesel (or Fuel Oil No 2), typically have very high rates evaporation and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined products is not standardized, and, sometimes, heavier intermediate oils fuel are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier are much products less volatile than normal Fuel Oil 2 no and can form more a persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly into thin films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the shoreline in few a hours, a slight staining, or greasy bathtub film-like ring common. is These oils usually do not form a stable emulsion and, as a result, do not form a heavy or sticky residual to clean up. that Note lighter refined products do have relatively a high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more and soluble more toxic than heavier oils. These oils do generally not present an involved cleanup problem. they However, can result in initial an toxic shock to biota and persist can a as biological threat in low energy marine environments. BEHAVIOR OF OILS: LUBE Lubricating oils are ubiquitous. They are used in all of types engines operating on at land, sea, or the in air. lubricating All oils are mainly composed of high-boiling (>400 point ??C) hydrocarbons containing 25 to 40 carbon per atoms molecule. Compound classes that impart undesirable qualities to a lubricant (waxes, polar compounds, and others) removed are in the refining processes. To meet the requirements of many engine different types operating and conditions, multitude a of oil products have been developed. These can be divided into two 1) groups: oils used in continuous service, such as turbine oils and 2) oils used in intermittent service, such as motor oils. Oils used in continuous service at operate fairly a constant temperature for prolonged periods without frequent or shutdown renewal. Stability is of prime importance. Oils used in intermittent service must show little viscosity change with temperature (high viscosity indices). These oils must also be changed at frequent intervals to remove particulates collected during service. Stability of these oils is, therefore, a secondary consideration. Additives: Additives are to used improve or impart various properties to the highly refined lubricating base oil. Automotive engine oils contain can a wide variety of additives including metallic detergents or ashless dispersants controlling for deposits, oxidation inhibitors, inhibitors, corrosion anti-wear additives, low temperature flow improvers, and viscosity friction modifiers. Railway locomotive diesel engine oils and marine diesel engine oils contain typically dispersants and ashless metallic detergents. Zinc-free detergents silver and lubricity agents are used where silver bearings are present. Environmental Behavior: Lubricating for oils, all their differences in formulation, many have similarities. When spilled into a lake, river, or ocean they will spread rapidly to a thin slick. They will not evaporate, and they will fairly disperse readily in high energy conditions without addition the of chemical dispersants. In general, lubricating oils are of low to moderate aquatic toxicity. While the base oils used in the production of lubricating are oils generally of extremely low
USCG contacted NOAA HAZMAT for a drift analysis for a derelict barge of unknown origin or ownership that has been floating around in Gulf of Alaska for past couple the of months. The was barge first noted approximately 200 miles south of Adak in Central the Aleutians on May 4, 2006. The vessel was recently sighted on Sept. 9 at 57-19.7N, 142-59.1W, approximately 200 miles of south St. Cape Elias in the Eastern Gulf of Alaska. By 20 Sept the barge had turned and then north in westward its drift and was approximately 50 NM south of Resurrection Bay on the shore south of the Kenai Peninsula. Coast Guard Sector has Anchorage been developing plans to salvage/tow the barge to safe port before it comes aground somewhere in southern Alaska. [SEP] Photo from USCG Cutter Maple [SEP] DRIFTING ABANDONED BARGE, 200NM SOUTH OF ADAK IS, AK 1130 ADT, Thursday September 14, 2006 (9/14): Sunset 2024 Sunrise (9/15): 0724 Sunset (9/15): 2021 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: through Today Tonight, the winds are forecast to be the from S to at SE 25-35 knots. Friday, the winds are predicted to be from the S to SE at 35-40 knots. _____________________________________ through Seas: Today Friday, seas are predicted to be 12-15 feet. _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today through Friday, is rain in expected the region. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today through Friday, cloudy skies are forecast. _____________________________________ Extended Saturday, Forecast: the winds are forecast to be from to the S SE 40-45 knots. Seas, 14-16 feet. Cloudy skies with rain the expected. Sunday, winds forecast are to be from S the to SE 30-35 knots. Seas, 14-16 feet. Cloudy skies with rain [SEP] The expected. location of the barge at 1042 LT, Sept. 20, was 59-11.604'N, [SEP] 149-54.480'W. Photo unmanned, of derelict barge in GOA [SEP] Search Area May Forecast 8, 2006 [SEP] Search Area Forecast May 6, 2006 [SEP] Back in May, 2006, the Alaskan Coast Guard was notified of an unmanned barge adrift 200 nautical miles south of Adak Island, and requested that NOAA perform some trajectory forecasts, which are earlier recorded in this incident. The barge has drifted now into the eastern Gulf of Alaska, the and Coast has renewed Guard their interest in it since is it now in the TAPS tanker flight cruising path. A CG C130 located it Sept on 8,9 and 14, and those positions are shown the on accompanying attachment. The content and the owner of the barge are still unknown. As a result, the CGC Maple arrived on-scene to attach lights to the barge well as as attempt better to identify it and possibly determine its contents. The CG will continue to monitor the situation the and position of the barge, and has put NOAA on notice of the incident for possible assistance in the coming days. The CGC Maple has requested been to provide on-scene weather reports. [SEP] Search Area Forecast May 7, 2006 John [SEP] Whitney reports that the USCG successfully towed the to barge Kodiak
On April 8, 2022, a well owned by Sandpoint Texas LLC experienced an failure, equipment discharging an estimated 8 gallons of sweet crude into a marsh bermed area near High The Island. discharge was reported by the RP on April 2022, 11, is and at the same site but not same the well as the discharge which occurred on April 1, 2022. On April 12, MSU Port Arthur contacted the Texas SSC to input request on marsh clean-up methods.
On December 2018, 9, the USCG Sector New Orleans contacted the NOAA SSC regarding an equipment failure on a wellhead casing in Lake Washington/Rattlesnake Bayou, near Port Sulphur, LA. The discharge amount is estimated to be ~129bbls of per crude/water/gas day. The source was not reported as secured. is USCG requesting a and trajectory potential resources at risk. [SEP] PORT SULPHUR, LA, UNITED STATES 12.10.2018 Photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Lora Ratliff U.S. Coast Guard District 8 Coast Guard Sector New Orleans is to continuing respond to an active product discharge near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, December 10, 2018. The Coast Guard is working with local and state agencies in the response to release. U.S. Guard Coast photo [SEP] USCG Image [SEP] Guard Coast responding to oil discharge in Rattle Snake Bayou NEW ???€? ORLEANS The Coast Guard is to responding an oil discharge near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, Sunday. Watchstanders at Coast Guard Sector Orleans New received a report from the National Response Center that a well crude oil in Rattle Snake Bayou, southwest of Port Sulphur, was reported to be leaking. The discharged amount has not been determined; the well is rated to produce 5,476 gallons of oil per day. It is unknown when the discharge The began. source of the discharge has not been secured. Hilcorp, the owner of well, the contracted has ES&H as an spill oil response organization. ES&H currently has 4 response boats 13 and personnel conducting containment and cleanup operations. Wild Well Control has contracted been to on work securing the source. Hilcorp also contracted an overflight the incident; of a Guard Coast helicopter conduced an aerial assessment as Also well. in involved the response are: Plaquemines Parish Sherriff???€?s Department Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator???€?s Office National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration The Coast Guard has issued a Safety Marine Information to Broadcast warn boaters in the area of spill. the The cause of the incident is under investigation [SEP] UPDATE: continues Response for Rattle Snake Bayou oil release U.S. Coast Guard sent this bulletin at 12/10/2018 09:11 PM EST News Release U.S. Coast Guard 8th District Heartland Contact: 8th District Public Affairs Office: (504) 671-2020 After Hours: (618) 225-9008 Eighth District online newsroom December UPDATE: 10, 2018 Response continues for Snake Rattle Bayou oil release Editors' Click Note: on images to download resolution high version. NEW ORLEANS - The Coast Guard continues to respond to a well discharging a mixture of crude oil, and gas, water near Port Sulphur, Louisiana, Monday. A Unified Command has been established of consisting the Coast Guard, Hilcorp, and the Louisiana Oil Coordinator's Spill Office. Approximately 1,700 feet of hard boom has been deployed to contain the discharging 2,000 oil, feet of absorbent boom to collect it, and gallons 630 of oily water have been so recovered far. Assets being utilized include: Five response and oil recovery vessels Four shoreline clean-up and assessment vessels One drone-capable boat The Coast Guard and Hilcorp are both conducting assessments aerial of the area. Wild Well Control is on scene working to secure the source of the Also discharge. involved in the response are: Plaquemines Parish Sherriff's Department Plaquemines Office of Environmental Management Louisiana Department Environmental of Quality Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration Energy Hilcorp has published a claims line for those impacted by the incident: Phone: Claims (337) 216-4311 Claims Fax: (337) 216-4435 The cause of the incident is under investigation. [SEP] -USCG- News Release U.S. Coast Guard District 8th Heartland Contact: 8th District Public Affairs Office: (504) 671-2020 After Hours: (618) 225-9008 Eighth District online newsroom UPDATE 3: Response continues for the Lake Washington A10 Leak Well NEW ORLEANS Unified ???€? The Command to respond continues to a well that discharged a mixture of crude oil, gas, and water near Sulphur, Port Louisiana, Sunday. At approximately 10:15 p.m. personnel on a rig barge mechanically plugged the well head permanently securing it. It is estimated that approximately 9,282 gallons of was oil discharged before the well was head controlled. Approximately 13,300 feet of hard has boom deployed. been Approximately 10,080 gallons of oily water mixture has been recovered so far. The Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries is on scene conducting response operations affected for wildlife in the area. report To oiled wildlife sightings, please LDWF call (337) at: 735-8677. -USCG- [SEP] USCG Press Release. UPDATE 2: Response continues for the Lake Washington A10 Well U.S. Leak Coast Guard sent this at bulletin 12/12/2018 08:04 PM EST News Release U.S. Coast Guard 8th District Contact: Heartland 8th Public District Affairs Office: (504) 671-2020 After (618) Hours: 225-9008 Eighth District online newsroom UPDATE 2: Response continues for the Lake Washington A10 Well Leak Editors' Note: Click on images to download high resolution version. NEW ORLEANS ???€? A Unified Command consisting the of Guard, Coast Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator???€?s Office and Hilcorp Energy continues to respond to well a that discharged a mixture of crude oil, and gas, water near Port Louisiana, Sulphur, Wednesday. Coast The Guard and Hilcorp are both conducting aerial assessments of the area. Source control crews have controlled the leak, and continue to work to repair the well in to attempt prevent discharging. further Approximately 11,000 feet of hard boom has been Approximately deployed. 4,830 gallons of oily water mixture have been recovered so far. There 116 are oil spill response on personnel scene conducting containment and clean-up operations. Assets being utilized Ten include: response vessels Five work boats marco Ten vessels skimming drum Two skimmers Ten airboats Three drone packages Also involved the in response are: Plaquemines Parish Sherriff's Department Plaquemines Office of Environmental Management Safety Environmental and Health Emergency Forefront Management OMI Solutions Environmental Coast Guard Strike Gulf Team Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration Birds were observed in the area affected but were not able to be captured. The Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries is conducting response wildlife operations. Hilcorp Energy has published a claims line for those by impacted the incident: Claims Phone: (337) 216-4311 Claims Fax: (337) 216-4435 -USCG- Coast [SEP] Guard responding to oil discharge in Rattle Snake Bayou U.S. Coast Guard sent this bulletin at 12/09/2018 05:48 PM EST News Release U.S. Coast Guard District 8th Heartland Contact: District 8th Public Affairs Office: 671-2020 (504) After Hours: (618) Eighth 225-9008 District online newsroom December 9, 2018 Coast Guard to responding oil discharge in Rattle Snake Bayou Editor's Note: For a high resolution version, click the on photo. NEW ???€? ORLEANS The Coast Guard is responding to an oil discharge near Port Sulphur, Sunday. Louisiana, Watchstanders at Coast Sector Guard New Orleans a received report from the National Response Center that a oil crude well in Rattle Snake Bayou, of southwest Port Sulphur, was reported to be leaking. The amount discharged has not been determined; the well rated is to 5,476 produce gallons of oil per day. It is unknown the when discharge began. The source of the discharge has not been secured. Hilcorp, the of owner the well, has contracted as ES&H an spill oil response organization. ES&H currently has 4 response boats and 13 personnel conducting and containment cleanup operations. Wild Well has been Control contracted to work on securing the source. Hilcorp also contracted an overflight of the incident; a Coast Guard helicopter conducted an aerial assessment as well. Also involved in the response are: Plaquemines Parish Sherriff???€?s Department Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator???€?s Office Oceanic Atmospheric National Administration The Coast Guard has issued a Safety Marine Information Broadcast to inform boaters in the area of the spill. The of cause incident the is investigation. under
On April 15, 2014, the USCG MSU Texas City contacted NOAA ERD to report a mobile floating drilling was unit hit a by wave large and was listing to one side. The Preventer Blowout (BOP) is shutting in the well. The MODU 112 is miles SE of Galveston Bay in the of Gulf Mexico in of 4000' water. NOAA ERD has provided on-scene weather forecast and a trajectory in the event of a discharge.
On 23, July 2013, NOAA ERD was notified of a well blowout & evacuation of personnel from the rig Hercules 265. This jackup rig is located south 40NM of Bay, Timbalier LA in South Timbalier Block 220. The well is predominantly natural gas, no report of sheen currently from USCG worst overflight, case discharge is 118 bbls of liquid/day (gas+oil+condensate).
On 9 July 2013, the USCG Morgan City Marine Safety Unit contacted the NOAA SSC requesting trajectory support for release an uncontrolled from a wellhead located in Louisiana’s Ship Shoal Block 225, approximately 45 miles offshore. Natural gas and crude product was reported as being released from the wellhead. Rainbow sheen is reported as 5 miles by ¼ miles. NOAA is currently providing scientific and weather support the to USCG.
On 03APR, USCG MSU Morgan City contacted NOAA SSC about a release of zinc bromide by offshore an drilling tanker (NRC #1042785). The vessel was conducting operations when winds high forces emergency an disconnect and the solution was released at depth of 4,700 ft below The surface. incident occurred 120 miles offshore, in Green Canyon Block 727. Reports claim quantities between 550 and 1652 of bbls solution was released. USCG is requesting information about potential environmental impacts and potential area of impact due to release. this
On 15FEB13, USCG Sector New Orleans contacted NOAA SSC regards in to a potential release of crude oil and condensate from an exploratory well being drilled about 50 mi east of Venice, LA. There is concern about an flow underground of natural gas at the site and personnel non-essential have evacuated from the shallow-water platform. The well's blow-out preventer successfully was is closed. There currently no pollution release and are operations underway to fully secure the well. USCG a requests trajectory of the worse-case discharge as a precaution.
On night, Thursday 29 September 2010, the NOAA SSC was notified by MSU Galveston of a leak well in the Gulf of Mexico. The location is far offshore (more than 100 miles SSE Galveston, of Texas) and roughly miles 25 W of the West Bank of the Flower Garden National Marine Sanctuary. The RP stated the when producing, well, was primarily a gas well; there was an observation of some product or coming condensate from the well that created a 10 light mile sheen yesterday.
Florida commands, Deepwater Horizon response. See "Deepwater Horizon" incident for summary and stats. The Florida Peninsula Incident Command (FPIC) Post was officially established on 02 June 2010. USCG Sectors St Petersberg,Key West, and Miami, Jacksonville are assigned branches as to FPIC. the The ICP relocated from the USCG Seventh District a to leased office space in downtown Miami at 1001 Biscayne Bay Drive building) (AON on 5 June. [SEP] Included here, and attached as PDF a file at page is bottom, an update of NOAA's support activities for the Deepwater Horizon (Mississippi Canyon 252) BP oil spill Credit: incident. NOAA. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- NOAA Web Update July 22, 2010 DEEPWATER HORIZON Incident Situation: Thursday 22 July ???€? STATEMENT NATIONAL BY INCIDENT COMMANDER ADMIRAL THAD ALLEN TROPICAL ON STORM BONNIE to "Due the risk that Storm Tropical Bonnie poses to the safety of the nearly 2,000 people responding to the BP oil spill at the well many site, the of vessels and rigs be will preparing to out move harm's of way beginning tonight. This includes rig the drilling the relief well that will ultimately kill the well, as well as other vessels needed for containment. Some of the vessels may be able remain on to site, but we will on err the side of safety. As I stated earlier today, I have directed BP continue to with well the shut in procedure while the work to kill the is well temporarily suspended. I have also directed BP take to measures to ensure the vessels operating the ROV's are the last to leave, and the first to return in order to maximize of monitoring the well. Monitoring of the site during well the integrity test remains one of the government's highest priorities. While these actions may delay effort the to kill the well several for days, safety the of the at individuals the well site is our highest concern. We staging are our skimming vessels and other in assets a manner that will allow us to promptly oil re-start mitigation efforts soon as the as storm passes and we can ensure the safety of our personnel." NOAA Fact RESPONSE Sheet: What to Expect South in the Florida from Horizon/BP Deepwater Oil Spill rida.pdf; (http://response.restoration.noaa.gov/book_shelf/2244_what_to_expect_in_southflo PDF, 400K). NOAA provides coordinated scientific weather and biological services response to federal, state, and local organizations. Experts from across the agency have mobilized to contain help the oil spreading spill and protect the Gulf of Mexico???€?s many marine mammals, sea turtles, fish, shellfish, and other endangered marine life. NOAA spill specialists are advising the U.S. Coast Guard on cleanup options, as well as all advising affected federal, state and local partners on sensitive marine resources risk at in this area of the Gulf of Mexico. Overflights are conducted on a basis daily (weather permitting) to provide verification field of trajectories. model Office NOAA???€?s of Marine and Aviation Operations (OMAO) is supporting the response work in the Gulf NOAA-owned with ships and aircraft. Currently, NOAA has deployed six NOAA-owned vessels in response to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. Please see GeoPlatform.gov/gulfresponse (http://www.geoplatform.gov/gulfresponse/index.html) for further information on the federal response to the Deepwater Horizon TRAJECTORIES Incident. Winds are forecast to be ENE on Friday at 10-15 and knots, then begin as increasing tropical a depression moves into north the central Gulf. On Saturday, are winds forecast to be E/SE at 20-30 knots, then decrease on Sunday to 10-15 knots. Today???€?s overflights and aerial indicate the imagery surface oil is continuing to break up into patches. numerous Trajectories indicate the leading edge to north the will continue to move northwestward into Breton Sound and the towards Chandeleur Islands. Oil moving around westward the Mississippi Delta is collecting in the convergence line associated the with water fresh ???€? outflow this oil will continue moving westward, threatening the Delta and shorelines west to Caillou Bay. OR&R???€?s modeling team continues to daily generate trajectories for the nearshore surface oil. The offshore trajectory maps (showing oil interacting the with Loop Current) have been temporarily suspended because the northern end of the Loop Current has been pinched off into a large eddy (Eddy Franklin) so there is no clear path for oil to the enter Loop Current from the source. Also, there have been no reports of recoverable oil in the Loop Current or Eddy Franklin and the oil has moved to north the and away from the Eddy Franklin. We will continue to monitor the area overflights, with vessel observations, and satellite analysis. When the threat of shoreline impacts to the Florida Keys increases, we will resume producing the offshore trajectory maps. The Loop Current is an area of warm water that comes up from the Caribbean, flowing past the Yucatan Peninsula and into Gulf the of Mexico. It generally curves east across the and Gulf then flows parallel to south the west Florida coast. An eddy is water that CLOSURES rotates. The July 13 closure remains in effect. (See map at http://sero.nmfs.noaa.gov/sf/deepwater_horizon/BP_OilSpill_FisheryClosureMap_071 310.pdf.) All commercial and recreational fishing, including catch and release, is prohibited in the closed however, area; transit through the area is allowed. The current closure 83,927 measures square miles (217,371 square kilometers) and covers about 35% of the Gulf of Mexico exclusive economic zone. The majority of federal waters in the Gulf of Mexico are open to commercial and recreational fishing. Modeling and mapping the and actual projected spill area is an not science. exact Fisheries NOAA strongly Service advises fishermen not to fish in areas where oil or oil sheens (very thin layers of floating oil) are present, even if those areas are not currently to closed fishing. Any changes to the closure are announced daily at p.m. 12 Eastern at http://sero.nmfs.noaa.gov/deepwater_horizon_oil_spill.htm and take effect 6 at p.m. Eastern the same day. SEA TURTLES AND MARINE MAMMALS (effective July 21, 2010) A total of 709 sea turtles have been verified from April 30 to July 21 within the designated spill area from Texas/Louisiana the border to Apalachicola, Florida. One dead turtle stranding was reported in Louisiana. Nine turtles hatchling were released in Florida from nests that were moved from the northern Gulf of Mexico. There 207 are live sea turtles in centers. rehabilitation include These 164 sea turtles captured as part of the on-water survey and operations, rescue and 43 turtles that stranded alive. A total of 184 stranded or captured turtles visible have had evidence of external oil since began verifications on April 30. include These that 167 are alive and 17 that are dead. All others have not had visible evidence of external oil. Of the 709 turtles verified from April 30 to July 21, a total of 478 stranded were turtles found 58 dead, stranded alive. Four of those subsequently died. Eleven live stranded turtles were released, and 43 live stranded are turtles being cared for at rehabilitation centers. Turtle strandings during this time period have been much higher in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and the Florida than Panhandle in previous for years this same time period. This be may due in part to detection increased and reporting, but this does not fully account for the increase. The Ship NOAA Pisces reported a dead 25-foot sperm whale on 15, June 2010, that was located miles 150 due south of Pascagoula, and Mississippi, approximately miles 77 due south of the spill site The last week. whale was decomposed and scavenged. heavily Samples of skin and blubber have been taken and will be analyzed. The whale had no evidence of external oil. Sperm whales are the only endangered resident cetacean in the Upper Gulf of Mexico. There are no records of stranded whales in the Gulf of Mexico for the month of June for the period 2003-2007. From April 30 to July 21, 66 dolphins stranded have been verified in the designated spill area. Of the 66 strandings, five were live strandings, three of which died shortly after stranding, one was released and one is in rehabilitation. Sixty-one dolphins were stranded found dead. Visible evidence of external oil was confirmed on dolphins. four We are at unable this time determine to whether the three dead stranded dolphins externally were oiled before or after death. Since April 30, the stranding for rate dolphins in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and the Florida Panhandle has been higher than the historic numbers for the same time period in previous years. In part, this may be due to increased detection and reporting and the lingering effects of an earlier observed spike strandings in the for winter of A 2010. stranding is defined as a dead or debilitated animal that washes ashore is or found in the water. NOAA and its partners are analyzing the of cause death for the dead stranded and dead captured sea turtles and the stranded marine mammals. This contains report corrections based on new information. The status of one live dolphin was changed from oiled to unoiled based on further evaluation. ASSESSMENT help To determine the type and amount of restoration needed
At approxiamtely 0900 local time, the USCG NOLA Sector contacted the SSC regarding well a blowout in Turtle Bay, The LA. USCG has sent out an overflight and USCG Houma Sector is responding on scene. The well is reported shut in, but "some oil" was released. Current amount and type fuel of unknown is at this time. The USCG has not requested any products from NOAA until more information is known. [SEP] Repairs have been by made the RP the and Sector USCG NOLA has scheduled a site visit for May Wednesday, 6th to verify repairs have made been and oil has cleaned been up. [SEP] There no were follow-up requests for support made to the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues require that follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response role Division???€?s in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response. [SEP] Map [SEP] Photo courtesy of the [SEP] USCG The well has been shut-in, but is sheening lightly. From the overflight observations, we have determined that there is a 1.5 mile X 1 mile of unrecoverable sheen within the impacted area. Be advised that the production from the flows well to the north tank half battery and that according to the company, well the produces 34 barrels of oil a day. Oil Mop is on scene the as OSRO. O'Briens is the Spill Management Team. The well has been boomed off with ft 100 of boom. Additionally, Harvey Cut is protected also containment with boom. USCG Sector New Orleans is also advising mariners to safely transit the area due the to wellhead damaged and oil release clean-up operations. We are awaiting a repair well-head plan from the company. Our team (USCG)will report on scene with the company tomorrow morning to assess the situation.
On the evening of 17 September 2008, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) notified was of a well blowout in Grand Bayou Blue at 29° 28.011’ N Lat. 090° 22.901’ W Long. This position places the release approximately 10 miles NNW of Galliano Louisiana. [SEP] Wx for Gallinao, Louisiana Overnight: Mostly clear, with a low around 66. North wind around 5 mph. Mostly Thursday: sunny, with a high near 83. Northeast wind between 5 and 10 mph. Thursday Night: A 20 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms. Partly cloudy, with a low around 70. East wind around mph. 5 Friday: A slight chance of with showers, also thunderstorms possible after 1pm. Mostly cloudy, with a high near 82. East wind around 5 mph. Chance of precipitation is 20%. Friday Night: A 30 percent chance of showers and thunderstorms. Mostly cloudy, with a low around 71. East wind around 5 mph. [SEP] (see attached file) [SEP] Image of reported location (image credit, google). Note marsh loss relative to older the much NOAA Chart. Image [SEP] of reported location (image credit, google). Note marsh loss relative to the much older NOAA Chart. This image is an simply view expanded of the previous [SEP] image. On the evening of 17 September 2008, the regional NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) was notified of a well blowout in Grand Bayou Blue at 28.011???€? 29?? N Lat. 090?? 22.901???€? W Long. This position places the release 10 approximately miles NNW of Galliano Louisiana. The USCG reported that the incident was observed at 1700 hrs (local time). The owner/operator reported that the christmas tree small and platform were missing. The cause is unknown, but may have been an The allision. initial report a was 8-10 foot gusher of but oil, by 2200 hrs, gush the had on decreased to 2-3 feet in height (possible bridging in). amount The of oil released is unknown. An Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) has been dispatched 4000 with feet of The boom. USCG is coordinating a either or RP USCG overflight in the morning assess to oil and pollution the status of the well. NOTE: The light predicted winds this evening may enhance the risk of and fire near explosion well the blowout. There will not be much wind. If there is significant natural gas escaping, the heavier components such propane as will not quickly dissipate and could accumulate and spread out from the wellhead. Proper safety precautions should be used to include establishment of a safety zone and air monitoring for personnel safety. The lack of wind will only increase risk. any The safe mitigation is not to be near the source. If of any the above information is wrong, contact please the NOAA as SSC it may have a direct effect on the predicted fate and transport. Initial Trajectory. The area identified essentially is an open water lake surrounded by highly broken coastal marsh. The current water levels are back to near normal tides after the storm surge from Hurricane Ike created an estimated 4-foot surge above normal tides in this area. The winds this evening had have been primarily from the N between at 3 to 8 mph. The forecasted winds overnight are expected to be light with a slight N component. Thursday By afternoon, the winds will have to shifted the NE then and E there is a chance 20% of evening showers. The observed would winds initially transport the oil to the broken marsh and canals the on S side of Grand Bayou Any Blue. oil still releasing and uncontained by Thursday may afternoon move to SW the in the direction of Lake Bully Camp Ponds. Given natural that containment is limited the by broken marsh and he network of man-made and canals bayous, the oil may to continue due spread to the influence of both winds and tides. We don't know when the accident started it but is that likely by tomorrow morning the leak would have undergone at one least complete tide cycle. Within the canals, tidal currents could move oil the about 1 -2 miles in either direction. With moderate winds from the N oil would move into the system canal to the S and enter Grand Bayou (which is about miles 3 south of the spill within location) 2 tidal cycles. The next high is tide predicted the for morning, early which could move oil into through and the broken marsh to the N. are Tides difficult to predict in this area especially with the freshwater flow and any lingering effects of flooding. Hurricane Ike The point is, oil could both N, move S, and W over the next 24-hour period, but the dominate movement should be S and SW. Recommendation Initial to Consider. safety Insure (see above). The response actions should focus on source control, containment near source at a safe distance due to potential fire and explosive issues from any natural gas released, and booming the affected spill essentially, area???€? put a box around problem the limit to the impact by booming off the cuts and canals would that allow oil to escape Grand Bayou Blue. [SEP] closest The tide station is in Terrebone Bay and is 20 about miles away fro the spill location. It has a predicted range a range of a little over a foot. To estimate tides for Grand Bayou Blue, We took the average wave speed and depth water and came up with following the ???€?best guess???€? to support the initial trajectory. The times could be off by as much as plus or minus 2 without hours taking into account and freshwater flow which was also investigated. Tide Prediction for Grand Bayou Blue Date Time Height(ft) Description 09/17/2008 ------------------------------------------------------- 04:36 +1.3 High Wed 14:15 +0.8 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 09/18/2008 05:03 +1.6 High Thu 15:43 +0.7 Low ------------------------------------------------------- 09/19/2008 05:46 +1.7 High 17:09 Fri +0.9 Low range The is probably less than a Attached foot. is a graph of water level at Lapeyrouse, La to the West but up in the marsh like the spill site. Note water the level change is only about1/2 foot. Another station up at Houma is even less. Probably max flow less at than 1/5 knot. In the canals into out and of Grand Bayou Blue, tidal currents will max out at about 1/3 knot with tidal excursion of about 2 miles. As previously these stated, are rough estimations only. Winds of 10 knots more or with windage of .3 will knots over dominate the tide. In canals, the the wind will push the oil to one shore pile and it up and smear it along shoreline. the The [SEP] has source been (mostly) partially by controlled securing divers an underwater valve, but some gas was reported to still be releasing. The current plan is to sting the well on Saturday shut to it fully in. The estimated release is 300 to 400 bbl of crude oil. The OSRO is continuing to secure the pockets of oil recovery and contamination. There is at least one open water still skimmer working in the area. NOAA will continue to provide assistance, remote but may go on to scene assist in any difficult issues. cleanup Such a reduced response posture is simply the balance of the potential impacts of this incident relative to magnitude the of activity Gustav post-Hurricanes Ike. and Charlie Henry NOAA Support Scientific Coordinator [SEP] boat "The launch is open and the path is clear to the scene. Not that bad. Source is contained with boom. Responders on scene and Oil working. drift is moving Pics SW. I when get back." above The is updated the brief from the State's overflight. Pictures will be available. posted when on Observations oil drift is in line with the trajectory submitted last night. [SEP] General relative to location SE Louisiana (image credit, google). [SEP] No http://waterdata.usgs.gov/la/nwis/rt station that is close enough to the spill site that we can easily use. [SEP] Note, there has been significant loss of marsh due oil to and gas and canals land other loss factors. Compare this map to the more recent images from Google. [SEP] On Monday, the USCG had again some noticed oil resurfacing, but later the in week (on 2 was Oct.) observed not that at all. The thinking is that oil what was that on the bottom for whatever reason (trapped with debris?) has come up. The cleanup site was moved to passive maintenance due to some oil trapped the in marsh and current low water conditions. LDEQ and LDWF didn't want anybody going into the marsh, so a passive plan was Unless initiated. the situation changes, this entry will constitute the final report.
At 1000 (CDT) a USCG overflight reported a well head in Barataria Bay, LA spraying gas/oil condensate. Volume unknown. RP unknown. ERD to contacted provide trajectory [SEP] information. Map [SEP] Date; Sept. 3, 2008 To: NOAA SSC Henry Charlie FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Studies, Simulation Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Well blowout in Barataria Bay ADDITIONAL FOR INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Watabayashi, Glen MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. The _______________________________________________________ reported scenario: An overflight at about 1000 CDT reported well a the blowout in upper section Barataria of Bay. There is brown a slick reported with the blowout. The location reported was at 29?? 25.40'N by 89?? 56.48'W. See map attached If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would any affect trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Today: winds from the S at knots. 10-15 Tonight: winds from the S at 10-15 knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots to shifting NW at Friday: 5-10. winds from the NE at 5-10 knots becoming SE at 5-10 knots. Saturday: winds the from SW at 5-10 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis With moderate winds from the S We would expect a slick to trend to the North with potential impacts to St Mary's Point and slicks that could enter the bayou on both sides of the St Mary's Point. The water level in Barataria Bay continues to drop and with above runoff normal we do expect not any crude that persists long enough to threaten the marshes to penetrate significantly the into marshes over the next 2 days. http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=82875&d=7&dt=S How far oil the travels will depend upon the type of oil an how much oil is being lost. At this point are these both unknowns. [SEP] There were no follow-up requests for support made the to NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on this There incident. are no known additional NOAA trustee that issues require follow-up that are to related the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the entry final for this response. http://www2.mvr.usace.army.mil/WaterControl/shefgraph-wotem2.cfm?sid=82875&d=7&dt=S [SEP] [SEP] BARATARIA BAY, LA Wednesday 1130 CDT, September 03, 2008 Sunset (09/03): Sunrise 1920 (09/04): 0639 Sunset (09/04): 1919 Forecast Winds: Today: winds from the S at 10-15 Tonight: knots. winds from the at 10-15 S knots. Thursday: winds from the S at 5-10 knots. Thursday night: winds from SW the at knots 5-10 shifting to NW at 5-10. Friday: winds from the NE at 5-10 knots becoming SE at knots. 5-10 Saturday: winds from the SW at 5-10 knots. Precipitation: Today: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Tonight: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Thursday night: scattered showers and thunderstorms. Friday: scattered showers thunderstorms. and Saturday: chance of showers thunderstorms. and Seas: Today: seas 2-4 light to feet, moderate chop in waters. protected Tonight: seas 1-3 feet, light to moderate chop in protected waters. seas Thursday: 1-2 feet, chop light in protected waters. Thursday night: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Friday: 1-2 feet, light chop in protected waters. Saturday: feet, 1-2 light chop in protected waters. Temperature: The temperatures are predicted to range from highs in the upper to 80???€?s lows in the upper 70???€?s.
NOAA received notification of a well blowout near Belle approximately Pass 15 miles SW of Patterson, LA from both the Louisiana Oil Spill Coordinator's Office (LOSCO) USCG and MSU City. Morgan It that was reported a kickback of natural gas occurred resulting in a well blowout. Initial stated reports that the well was discharging unknown an amount natural of gas and condensate. Some estimates suggest that 50 approximately barrels of condensate were discharge at the time or shortly after the kickback. At this time, the well has not ignited. [SEP] The following was information derived from an provided update by LOSCO. All that 22 personnel were conducting the drilling operations were safely evacuated and no injuries were reported. The blowout well and release of gas and condensate is continuing, and has not ignited. The gas cloud and visible plume is traveling in a westerly direction from the well. The Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) on-scene indicated an sheen unknown been has observed in Belle Isle Lake. Cudd Control Well (wild well control specialist) has been contracted to perform the well control and operations the initial assessment well be will completed by 1500 today. A command has post initiated been at ES&H in Houma, LA. The anticipated production rate for the well is +/-2 million feet cubic natural of gas and 100 barrels of per condensate day (24 hours). The updated well location is reported as: 29 degrees 31 minutes 23 seconds N Lat. 091 degrees 23 minutes 12 seconds W Long. [SEP] Overflight photograph from PM flight, 18 Dec. 2007 (Credit, RP's Spill Management Team, ES&H). [SEP] Location map by provided LOSCO. [SEP] A approximately 1235 hours on 22 December 2007, the Belle Isle Incident transitioned from an emergency into project phase a phase. well The blowout had been secured. The NWS contacted was to discontinue the notification related to this incident. Minimal environmental injury been has to reported date. Overflight [SEP] photograph PM from 18 flight, Dec. 2007 (Credit, RP's Spill Management Team, ES&H). TIME: [SEP] 1330 CST Tuesday, December 18, 2007 TO: NOAA SSC Henry Charlie FROM: Robert Jones NOAA/Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Phoenix Well Blowout FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT: NOAA OFFICE OF RESPONSE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE RESTORATION, DIVISION, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) _______________________________________________________ 526-4911. Per your request, we have looked at air the hazard of implications the release from the Phoenix Well blowout, Belle Pass, Iberia Parish, LA. The anticipated production for rate the well +/-2 is million cubic feet of natural and gas 100 barrels of condensate day per (24 hours). The well blowout and release of and gas condensate is continuing, and has ignited. not The gas cloud and visible plume traveling is in a westerly from direction the well. The well location is reported as: 29??31'23"N - If 091??23'12"W. any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect hazard implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WEATHER: SE Today: winds at 10 knots. Slight chance of showers. Tonight: SE at winds 5 knots. Slight chance of showers. Wednesday: SE at winds 10 knots increasing to 15 knots. chance of showers thunderstorms. and 2) AIR HAZARD: Fire Hazard: is Methane the dominant gaseous component of gas, natural though some higher weight molecular hydrocarbons can be also present significant in amounts. Flash fire the is hazard main associated with natural gas releases. As the natural gas travels downwind from the release point it mixes with air and forms a cloud consisting of fuel-air a which mixture can ignite; historically, numbers significant fatalities have been associated with flash fires from accidental releases. Lightning from thunderstorms possible could provide an ignition source, but it is unlikely. Under the conditions wind anticipated through Wednesday, the hazard zone from the gas, as defined by the possible flammable cloud, will extend as as far 300 downwind, yards Rain higher and winds will diminish the threat zone somewhat. A small fraction of the higher molecular weight material can be carried downwind and deposited on the This water. material is also flammable and if the wind corrals this material into a pocket the shore, along it could generate also sufficient vapors to form a hazard, localized fire though this is an unlikely hazard: scenario. Inhalation The major chemical components associated with natural gas wells exhibit acute low toxicity to inhalation. If the concentration of natural gas is high enough, may it cause asphyxiation by displacing oxygen. The toxic inhalation threat zone is expected to be than smaller the flammable threat zone. Higher molecular weight compounds can travel downwind as aerosol an cloud and out. rain particulates These can be toxic by We inhalation. cannot model this but recommend responders use that visual cues to assess this hazard. Some less dominant from components a natural gas can well be very toxic. Sulfur compounds, hydrogen like sulfide, are highly toxic by and inhalation can hard be to detect. We do not have any information suggesting that there are significant sulfur compounds from this spill; however, we it think is important for the responders to be aware of this possibility. [SEP] PHOENIX WELL BLOWOUT, BELLE IBERIA PASS, PARISH, LA 1230 CDT, Tuesday Dec 18, 2007 Sunset (Dec 18) 1709 Sunrise (Dec 19) 0655 Sunset (Dec 19) 1709 Forecast: SE Today: winds 10 at knots. Tonight: SE winds at knots. 5 Wednesday: SE winds at 10 knots increasing to 15 knots. Seas: Today: coastal and lakes bays Tonight: smooth. coastal lakes and bays Wednesday: smooth. 2-4 seas feet. Precipitation: Today: slight chance of showers. Tonight: slight chance of showers. Wednesday: chance of and showers thunderstorms. Visibility: Mostly clear skies forecast. are Temperature: The high is forecast be to in the mid to upper 60's, the low is predicted to be the in mid 50's. [SEP] Evening Report Regional The SSC NOAA arrived on-scene at the Houma Command Post at approximately 1600 hrs. The situation had not significantly changed from the earlier update. NOAA met with the USCG on-scene representative and the incident management team representing the The RP. primary objective was to insure the protection of the public and responders by keeping duck hunters and fishermen of out the area and conduct monitoring insure to safe responder activities. NOAA had provided an assessment of the plume threat from a Lower Explosive (LEL) Limit prospective using a 10% of the LEL for Methane and modeling the plume as a heavy gas to account in part for the affect of the condensate and vapor. water The general safety guidelines established the by remediation was a 1-mile zone: exclusion this value was greater than the modeling provided distance by NOAA for fire and explosion The risk. wild well team had a conducted preliminary and assessment considering was a tactic of engaging the blowout prevention manually (not sure how that will be done, but more information may be available the at morning planning meeting). The connected SSC the USCG with the NWS to provide a warning broadcast the on National Weather Service Broadcast similar to the notice broadcast to mariners. Some boom has been deployed, but the slick the from condensate that has rained out in Belle Lake was reported as light. There was consideration of the placement sorbent of boom materials in key location if it could be done safely. NOAA Personnel On-Scene: Charlie Henry, SSC [SEP] PHOENIX WELL BLOWOUT, BELLE PASS, IBERIA PARISH, LA CDT, 1100 Wednesday Dec 19, 2007 Sunset (Dec 19) 1709 Sunrise (Dec 20) 0655 Sunset (Dec 20) 1709 Forecast: Today: winds SE at 5-10 knots increasing to 10-15 knots in the afternoon. Tonight: S winds at 10-15 knots. Thursday: SW winds at 15-20 becoming knots W in the afternoon. Thursday night: winds NW 10-15 knots becoming N 5-10 knots late. Friday: SE winds 15-20 knots. Saturday: NW winds 20-25 knots. Sunday: knots. NE winds 15-20 Seas: Today: seas 2 feet, coastal lakes and bays smooth becoming a light chop. Tonight: seas 2-3 coastal feet, lakes bays and light chop. Thursday: seas 2-3 feet, coastal lakes bays and choppy. Thursday night: 2-3 feet, coastal lakes and bays light chop. Friday: 2-4 feet, coastal lakes and bays choppy. Saturday: 5-6 feet, coastal lakes and bays rough. Sunday: 3-4 feet, coastal lakes and bays choppy. Precipitation: Today: chance slight of Tonight: showers. chance of showers and thunderstorms. Thursday: chance of showers and Some thunderstorms. thunderstorms may be severe the in morning hours. slight Friday: chance of showers and thunderstorms. chance Saturday: of showers and thunderstorms. Sunday: slight chance of showers. Visibility: Mostly cloudy skies are through forecast Thursday night. Friday, mostly clear skies are expected. Saturday, mostly cloudy skies are predicted. Sunday, mostly clear skies are forecast. Temperature: The high is forecast to be in the 70's, low the low is predicted be to in mid the to upper 50's. [SEP] Resources at Risk for Belle Isle 1-42 Well Blowout, LA I. Spill Source Information This report was prepared at 1145 EST on 18 2007. December This report describes resources
On June 11, ERD 2007 notified was of a blowout well 15 miles south of Intercoastal City, LA. [SEP] On Tuesday 7/10/07, the RP conducted an operation remove to a portion of the contaminated spoil facilitate to addition widening of the canal. The so-called "scalping operation" of spoil the bank on the northeast side of the well/slip was conducted to separated contaminated soil from uncontaminated soil and dredge spoil (see photos attached & map by provided RP's environmental consultant). [SEP] Photograph taken during the 2 2007 July site visit (photo credit, NOAA). Approaching the derrick in the end south of the canal. A jack-up rig several and additional barges are shown to assist the cleanup and repair. A [SEP] series of site photographs by taken a USCG Pollution Investigation Team have added been ResponseLink. to No specific information for any of the photographs was provided. The photos primarily illustrate the appearance of accumulated mud that was blown on facility the structures and adjacent spoil bank and wetland habitat (photo credit ,USCG). [SEP] BLOWOUT, WELL FRESHWATER BAYOU CANAL, LA 1300 CDT, Monday June 11, 2007 Sunset (06/11): 1952 Sunrise (06/12): 0602 Sunset (06/12): 1952 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: This the afternoon, winds are predicted to be from the SW at Tonight, 5-10 knots. the winds are forecast to be from the SW at 5-10 shifting knots late tonight to be from the NW at 5-10 knots. Tuesday, the winds are expected to be from the SW at 5-10 knots. _________________________ Waves: through This afternoon Tuesday, the seas are to expected be 1-2 feet in open water with protected waters being smooth. _________________________________ Precipitation: This afternoon through Tonight, scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms are in forecast the region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight Thursday, through mostly clear skies expected. are Temperatures: _________________________________ Temperatures are expected range to from highs in the mid to upper 80's to lows in the mid 70's. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Wednesday, SW winds at 5-10 knots. Seas are expected to be 1-2 feet in open water with protected waters smooth. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms. Thursday, winds SW at 5-10 knots. Seas are expected to be 1-2 feet in open water with protected waters smooth. cloudy Partly skies. Chance of scattered afternoon showers and thunderstorms. Friday, S winds at 10-15 knots. Seas are expected to feet be 2-3 in open with water waters protected smooth. Partly cloudy skies. Chance of afternoon showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Photograph taken during the 2 July 2007 site visit (photo credit, NOAA). Close-up view of mud after more than a month. The mud has dried to form the pattern observed repeated after rains and hot sun-baked days. [SEP] A series of site taken photographs a by USCG Pollution Investigation have Team been added to ResponseLink. No specific information for any of photographs the was provided. photos The illustrate primarily the appearance of accumulated mud that was blown on the facility structures and adjacent spoil bank wetland and habitat (photo ,USCG). credit Document [SEP] that delineates area of drill mud on deposition adjacent spoil bank. Information provided RP's by Consultant. [SEP] Environmental Photograph taken during the July 2 2007 site visit (photo credit, NOAA). of View unimpacted are on east side of canal. This exposed spoil bank was to similar on that the opposite side incident. before the [SEP] Small scale Map Base [SEP] A series of site photographs by taken a USCG Pollution Investigation Team have been added to ResponseLink. specific No information for any of the was photographs provided. The photos primarily illustrate the appearance of accumulated mud that blown was on the facility structures and adjacent spoil bank and wetland habitat credit (photo [SEP] ,USCG). Photograph taken during the July 2 2007 site visit (photo credit, NOAA). Ground view with derrick in background. [SEP] On 2 July 2007, representatives from the State of Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ), States United Coast Guard (USCG), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and Responsible Party (RP) representatives conducted a site visit of the well blowout area to assess cleanup environmental needs and The requirements. environmental site assessment had been delayed due to continuing to efforts fully secure the well and related safety concerns. At present, the well is still being worked to restore full control, but was deemed safe for the planned activities. The rig currently on-site will be demobilized and addition equipment brought to in complete the well control operation. From an environmental prospective, the two primary are concerns the mud deposited into the canal and itself the mud deposited on the and spoil bank wetland habitat. adjacent It was impossible to assess the canal given the current operations; therefore, this site focused visit only on adjacent the spoil bank and marsh. drilling The structure is located at end of the a man-made, dead-end canal and just north of Vermillion Bay. well The blowout resulted in a amount large of fluid drilling (mud) being on deposited the rig, in the adjacent canal, and on the eastern-side spoil bank. The drilling fluid was reported to be composed 56.5 of to 57 percent by volume diesel fuel as a lubricant, 4.5 5 percent to water, and 38.5% by volume solids (primarily barite, a natural clay mineral). At the time of the incident, the log reported that 439 bbls of drilling mud was in the drill stream that and a total of 3,728 bbls the composed entire circulating volume. is It unknown presently how much of this material was lost to the of environment. Much it sprayed was onto the and rig barge itself. In some places, the thickness was reported as 6 feet at the base of derrick. the It is unknown to what extent production water and produced (light condensate petroleum distillant from the gas reservoir) impacted the adjacent area. During the event, mud spray impacted an area estimated as between 2 and 3 acres by coving the surface with a thick coating diesel-based of mud up to 10 to 12 cm in thickness. During the site visit, the deposition was characterized roughly as light (only trace, a few mm), and heavy. The RP's Environmental Representative will prepare a rough composite map of the area assessed. Adjacent vegetation was killed to include hackberry several and black locust trees and various scrub plant species and marsh adjacent plants. Given that most of the area exposed was spoil bank prior to the incident, the vegetative coverage of impacted the area was small. A composite sample of the surface mud contamination collected was for analysis by NOAA. the In impacted area, multiple attempts to recolonize the area by fiddler was crabs evidenced, but none of the crab burrows were completed and several dead fiddler crabs were observed. No live crabs were observed in the impacted area. Such would observations suggest that some mitigation would be required, and that was generally stated by the USCG representatives. Final discussion was postponed until the analytical results available. were To complicate the cleanup or mitigation process, the RP reported that they were considering a proposal widen to the work area by widening the canal. The state and federal representatives on the site requested visit that during any removal activity that the contaminated mud and sediments be segregated for and assessment proper disposal. At present, none of the regulatory agency had been presented an actual proposal. The plan was being only assessed the by RP at this time. Also note that the canal did have form some of flapper access gated on the south end probably for water management purposes. At present, this been has sealed with concrete. This report characterizes the general observations of the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator on-scene, and has not been reviewed or edited by the other members of site the assessment team. It will be provided to them for review, and report the may be edited in the future.
At 1050 local time on 9/20/06, Stone a Energy platform at South Timbalier Block 8 a had gas blowout. The well is 15 releasing MCF/hr (Thousand Cubic Feet) of gas and an unknown of volume oil condensate. is a There 1 mile by yd 150 silver sheen heading SW from the platform. USCG has WX, requested trajectory, and limits. explosive There is a safety zone the around platform. [SEP] Final Report The assessment of the well blowout latter that day a identified valve failure. corrosion The rate release of gas was much less than initially A reported. small leak, characterized as small a plume, less than 6 feet, coming point-source from a corrosion leak. The facility planned to replace the damaged value the next morning. Safety were precautions to remain in place. addition No reports were received from the USCG. It was assumed that the repair was conducted without incident. This report represents the final report. hotline [SEP] GAS WELL BLOWOUT, SOUTH BLOCK TIMBALIER 8, LA 1600 CDT, Wednesday September 20, 2006 Sunset (9/20): 1859 (9/21): Sunrise 0648 Sunset (9/21): 1858 _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Tonight, the winds are expected to be from the NE at 10-15 knots becoming E at 10-15 knots midnight. after the Thursday, winds are predicted to be from the SE at 10-15 knots becoming S at 10-15 knots in the evening. _____________________________________ Seas: Today through Tonight, seas are predicted to be 1-3 feet. Thursday, the seas expected are to start at 2-3 out feet and increase to 3-4 by the hours. evening _____________________________________ Precipitation: Today, no shower activity is expected in the region. Thursday, showers and possible thunderstorms are predicted in the late afternoon. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Today Tonight, through clear skies are forecast. Thursday, cloudy skies are expected. _____________________________________ Extended Forecast: Friday, the winds are forecast to from be the S at 15-20 knots. Seas, 3-5 feet protected waters choppy. Cloudy skies with showers and a chance of thunderstorms. Saturday, the winds are expected to be from the S 10-15 at knots. Seas, 3-4 feet, protected waters light to moderate chop. Cloudy skies with showers and a chance of thunderstorms. the Sunday, winds are predicted to be from the S knots. at 5-10 Seas, 1-2 feet, protected waters chop. light Cloudy skies with chance a of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] The NOAA Scientific Coordinator Support was notified by Marine USCG Safety Office of Morgan City a well blowout in South Timbalier Bay Block at 8 1500 on hrs 20 September 2006. The release was reported to have begun 1050 local time. The is well reported to be owned by Energy Stone Inc. The well was to releasing reported be natural gas at a rate of 15 MCF/hr (Thousand Cubic Feet per hour) and an unknown volume of condensate. oil The USCG that reported a 3 mile safety zone has been There announced. is a 1 mile by 150 yd sheen leading to the SW from the blowout. An Oil Spill Response Organization (OSRO) has been launched to further assess the situation. The USCG has asked for trajectory support relative to oil the release. the If well is discharging mostly and gas very little condensate as reported, the NOAA SSC restated that biggest the response concern be would the potential for an or explosion fire. NOAA is working currently up a series of to products the support response. [SEP] TIME: Wednesday, 1630 Sept. 20, 2006 TO: NOAA SSC Charlie Henry FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Division Response Modeling and Simulation Seattle, Studies WA 98115 SUBJECT: Gas Well Blowout, South Timbalier Block 8, LA ADDITIONAL FOR INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, 98115. PHONE WA (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, have we at looked the air hazard trajectory and gas implications a well blowout in South Timbalier Block 8, LA. These are notes based the on following information: At 1050 local time on 9/20/06, a Stone Energy platform at South Timbalier Block 8 had a gas blowout at location 29deg03'13"N 090deg38'24"W. The well thought is to be releasing 15 MCF/hr (Thousand Cubic Feet per hour) of gas and an unknown volume of oil condensate. A 1-mile by 150 yd silver sheen heading SW from the platform has been observed. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ WIND: 1) Tonight, the winds expected are to be from the at northeast 10-15 knots east becoming at 10-15 knots after midnight. Thursday, the winds are predicted to from be the southeast at 10-15 knots, becoming south 10-15 at knots in the evening. 3) AIR HAZARD: The released gas poses a flammability hazard. To estimate the threat distances, NOAA's air model, dispersion ALOHA, was used to predict the dispersion the of gas. We estimate that the air concentration of methane at sea level drops below 10% of the lower flammability limit less that 100 yards downwind of the source. The well reported is to not be a "sour" well, so we don't expect a potential for a toxic inhalation hazard due to hydrogen sulfide 2) SURFACE OIL TRAJECTORY: There is expected to be a small coastal current moving down beach (to the west) in the region. The movement of any surface oil from condensate will be dominated by the The winds. forecast winds will move the sheen away from and shore to the east this afternoon and evening. Tomorrow morning, when winds the are expected to to shift be from the southeast, any remaining sheen could be moved shore. toward At this time, reports are that the sheen is persisting enough long to extend about 1 mile from the If source. the rate release remains similar, any then sheen moving shore will toward likely be broken up before it shore. reaches addition, In the stronger winds will tend to break up the sheen faster, resulting in a length shorter persistent of sheen. Any small amount of oil that does persist long enough to reach shore will likely beach on Isle Derniers, near Trinity Bay.
At 0715 on Monday, August 15, well head in the Pass A Loutre Wildlife Management Area blew out, crude spewing oil and natural gas into the freshwater surrounding marsh. The spill, from Enervest #501, Well is located at 29d 05'45"N, 089d 10'09"W released approximately 50 bbls of oil. Some sheen moved from the immediate area and out through Dennis into Pass the Gulf of Mexico, but of most the oil was contained in the marsh, of it much two in different approximately pockets 200 yards by 150'. Some the oil of stuck in the bordering Roseau 2000' cane. of boom was on-scene as well as 5 skimmers were No on-scene. wildlife injuries were reported were. [SEP] On Tuesday during cleanup operations it was acknowledged that there was much more then oil initially reported. The current estimate was increased to at least 175 barrels of oil in the water. At the Tuesday evening brief, a SCAT plan was developed for the next Today day. two boats with members of USCG, LADEQ, NOAA, and representatives for the RP covered the spill area to the south west of and the spill source. There are some areas where some emulsified oil has accumulated, but most of the roseau cane seen was either slightly stained or unaffected. The areas further south and west some had sheen in the water, but appeared to be unaffected. The tides appear to be playing a large in role spill, the with two tidal changes foot adjusting the location of the boom. The tidal change also formed a strong current that helped flush out spilled out and sheen. Most of the oil is contained in the containment boom in different two zones, but some sheen is actually far moving enough down Dennis Pass sheen that water and hyasinth is down drifting out into the Gulf of Mexico. There have been no observed impacts along the land from sheen. this SCAT continue will tomorrow, and once completed a detailed map the describing impacted areas be will up. drawn Over 150 barrels of liquid have been recovered scene on from skimmers. Hazing canons were placed on scene this morning and there have been no reported wildlife injuries. The NOAA SSC continues to work the incident. [SEP] As 1000 of the Tuesday, well was under control. [SEP] picture by ESandH [SEP] At 0715 on Monday, August 15, well head in the Pass A Loutre Wildlife Management Area blew out, spewing crude oil and natural gas into the freshwater surrounding marsh. The spill, from Enervest Well is #501, located at 29d 05???€?45???€?N, 089d 10???€?09???€?W has released approximately 50 bbls of oil. By early afternoon, Monday, some sheen had moved from the immediate area and out thru Dennis Pass into the Gulf of Mexico, most but of the oil was contained in the marsh, much of it two in different pockets approximately 200 yards by 150???€?. Some of the oil is stuck in bordering the Roseau cane. From the Tuesday morning briefing, it was discussed that the well-head is still leaking, but workers are on-scene today to secure well, the which is spewing mostly natural gas now. There is 2000???€? of boom on as scene well as 5 skimmers. There been have no wildlife reported, injuries but rehab teams are on stand-by. Hazing will occur at night. Members of the USCG, LA DEQ, and LADWF are on scene with the OSRO. The NOAA will SSC continue to aid the state trustees and USCG and closely the monitor situation. [SEP] courtesy ESandH. Tuesday As of around the 1000 had well been controlled. [SEP] Picture here of sorbant boom containing a pocket heavy of oil. Not the difference in color above (oily side) below and (clean side). [SEP] This picture shows an area near the roseau cane with water hyacinth surrounded by weathering oil. [SEP] A Hotline has created been to capture information related to the Dennis Pass Wellhead Blowout, LA incident. [SEP] Picture of Roseau Cane taken immediately behind the leak source. is This the hit hardest area of [SEP] cane. Members of the USCG, NOAA, LADWF, and representatives of the RP conducted an overflight on Tuesday afternoon. Though some was progress made in the contaminated zone, there was heavy still sheening visible throughout site the as well as black oil and emulsified oil in various locations, especially in the area near spill the source. documents Draft of a "When Clean is Clean" and an oil impact map (approved by the RP) will produced be and given to the trustees. The NOAA to SSC continues support the USCG with the spill. Resources at [SEP] Risk for Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area, LA Spill I. Source Information This report was prepared on 15 August 2005. Information in this report is based on the assumption that an estimated 50 bbl of condensate/crude oil a was mix released into Dennis Pass N, (29&#8734;05???€?45???€? 89&#8734;10???€?09???€?W). II. Geographic Region Covered This report covers Pass Loutre a Wildlife Management Area the in vicinity Dennis of Pass. report This does not necessarily correspond to or actual potential spill locations. Consult other Hotline reports for spill location information. III. Shoreline Resources at Risk Habitats in the area predominantly are freshwater marsh. There are four sand small beach islands in Garden Island Bay, and a few other sand wave-cut beaches, platforms clay, in and sheltered tidal flats along Garden Island Bay. III. Biological Resources at Risk Threatened and Endangered Species Piping plover (federally threatened) may be present approximately 4 miles from the release site on in beaches Garden Island Bay and East Pass. These islands are within the Critical Designated boundaries Habitat defined as the by USFWS. Loggerhead (federally and state threatened) and Kemp???€?s (federally ridley and endangered) sea turtles be may Gulf in present in waters low concentrations. Gulf sturgeon (federally state and threatened) may be present in Other inland Birds waters. Three colonial waterbird rookeries containing egrets, herons, and ibises occur approximately 2-3 miles from the release site. Nesting for activities most species have likely concluded by August, but young may be present in the area. Mottled duck (3-18 ind/mi2) may be nesting in freshwater marshes. Shorebirds may migrating be the through area. Fish Largemouth bass are present in low concentrations (spawning adults, eggs, larvae, and juveniles) in freshwater marshes. croaker Atlantic (larvae and juveniles, abundant), black drum and (larvae juveniles, common), gulf menhaden (juveniles, highly abundant), red drum (larvae and juveniles, common), sand seatrout (juveniles, abundant), sheepshead (juveniles, common), silver perch (juveniles, common), southern (juveniles, flounder common), spot (juveniles, highly spotted abundant), seatrout (juveniles, common) are present in inland waters in August. Larvae and juveniles are particularly sensitive to the toxic components oil. of Inverts Blue crab (eggs, larvae, and juveniles, highly abundant), brown shrimp (larvae and juveniles, abundant), gulf stone crab (juveniles, common), pink shrimp (larvae and juveniles, and common), white shrimp (larvae and common) juveniles, present are in inland waters August. in of Gulf estuaries Mexico provide Essential Fish Habitat (EFH) for brown shrimp, white shrimp, drum, red mackerel, Spanish cobia, and bluefish. Reptiles and Terrestrial Mammals Alligators be may nesting and hatching in freshwater marshes. Small furbearers are present in marshes. Marine Mammals Bottlenose dolphins may present be in the area. IV. Human-Use The release site is Pass within a Loutre Wildlife Management Area. [SEP] sections of water hyacinth in the marsh with recoverable oil.
At 1800 on hrs the evening of July 9 2004, the NOAA SSC was notified of a well blowout in Barataria Bay, Louisiana. The initial to report the USCG was of oil into spraying 300' the air from a wellhead. As additional information became available, the magnitude of the problem was much than less originally reported. The release was caused by a value pipeline failure on small a platform located at 29deg 04' 39" N Lat. 090deg 52' 14" W Long. Because of the pressure the in line, the release did a create visible plume, but little oil was very released. The reported RP that only about 30 gallons actually was lost. A small slick was at observed the platform and moving toward open water. An overflight by the USCG identified no (or no oil oil observations of any significance). light The sheen probably dissipated rapidly. NOAA did provide weather and trajectory based support on the initial reports of a potential major oil release. [SEP] Initial and Final Report At hrs 1800 on the evening of 9 July 2004, NOAA the SSC was notified of a well blowout in Barataria Bay, Louisiana. The initial report to the USCG was of oil spraying 300???€? into the air a from wellhead. As additional information became available, magnitude the the of problem was much less than originally reported. The release was caused by a pipeline value failure on a small platform located at 29?? 04???€? 39???€? N Lat. 090?? 52???€? 14???€? W Long. Because of the pressure in the line, the release did a create visible plume, but very little oil released. was The RP reported that only about gallons 30 was actually lost. A small slick was at observed the platform and moving toward open water. An overflight by the identified USCG no oil (or no oil observations of any significance). light The sheen probably dissipated rapidly. NOAA did provide weather and trajectory support based the on initial reports of a potential major oil release. [SEP] To: NOAA SSC Charlie / Henry MSO Morgan City From: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies WA Seattle, 98115 SUBJECT: Release Pipeline in Lake Pelto. FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen MODELING Watabayashi, AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE _______________________________________________________ (206) 526-4911. Per your request, we have looked at trajectory of implications a pipeline valve leak in Pelto, Lake Louisiana. notes These are based on the following On information: July 9th 2004, there was a release for an unknown from period pipeline a located at 29??04???€?39???€? N, 90??52???€?14???€? W in Lake Pelto, near Pass, Whiskey LA. It is unknown when release the began, and it was shut down about at 6:10pm July 9th. If any of this initial information incorrect, is please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WIND: Tonight, the winds are predicted to be the from SE at 10 knots. Tomorrow, the winds are forecast to from be the SE at 8 knots. Tomorrow night, S winds at 5 knots are 2) expected. TRAJECTORY NOS The tidal predictions for this area there indicate was a low tide at about 5:30 near pm the time of the release. The next high tide is at about 5:30 the am next morning. The result is that at the near time the release, for and the following 10 hrs or so, tidal currents will tend to move any released into oil Caillou Bay, not and it carry out beyond the barrier islands. If the release began earlier than about tidal 4:00pm, currents could have moved the oil toward the southwest, potentially outside of the barrier The islands. wind forecast is to be primarily from the south and southeast, which move will the toward oil shore, and to the northwest. We expect the shore near the release could be oiled, and shoreline oiling could occur as far to the northwest Taylor???€?s as Bayou by Saturday if evening, the oil persists. [SEP] PELTO LAKE OIL SPILL, LOUSIANA 1900 CDT, Friday July 2004 9, (7/9): 2005 Sunset Sunrise (7/10): 0612 Sunset (7/10): 2005 NOTE: This is a site-specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. _____________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast: Winds: Tonight, the winds are predicted to be the from SE at 10 knots. Tomorrow, winds the are forecast to be from the SE at 8 knots. Tomorrow S night, winds at 5 knots are expected. _____________________________________ Waves: Tonight through tomorrow night, the seas are expected to be 1-2 feet. _____________________________________ Tonight Precipitation: through tomorrow a night, chance of showers and thunderstorms are predicted. _____________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight, partly cloudy skies are predicted. Tomorrow, mostly cloudy skies are forecast the in afternoon, becoming partly cloudy overnight. _____________________________________ Temperatures: Temperatures are forecast to range from highs the in upper 80s to lows in the _____________________________________ low 80s. Extended Forecast: Sunday, S winds at knots 5 are predicted, becoming SW at 8 overnight. knots Seas are expected to be 1 foot. Partly cloudy skies are forecast, with a chance of showers and thunderstorms. Monday, NW winds at 5 knots are forecast. Seas are predicted to be 1 foot. Partly cloudy skies are with forecast, a slight chance of showers and thunderstorms. [SEP] Hotline > has been opened the for Lake Pelto Oil Spill, Coast.. Louisiana
A in well Louisiana had a blowout and a NOAA fire. provided weather. [SEP] There were follow-up no requests for support made to the NOAA Support Scientific Coordinator on this incident. There are no known additional NOAA trustee issues that require follow-up that are related to the Emergency Response Division???€?s role in emergency response. This record constitutes the final entry for this response.
On December 1, 1970, Shell Oil Co. Platform 26 exploded caught and fire. The platform included 22 production wells with a capacity 15,000 of barrels of crude oil per day. The flames from the burning platform blazed 400 feet into the air. The 21-B well, with a 424-barrel per day capacity, ruptured 12 feet above the By water. December 3, the crane service had collapsed towards the center of the platform at a 60? Burning angle. oil covered the surface the of water within 50 feet of the By platform. December 7, well No. 21-B was contributing to 30-50 percent of the fire. Shifting winds, fog and rough seas mitigation slowed efforts at times. Holes were shot into the tubing of some of wells the determine to whether oil was still being produced. On January 12, Shell Co. Oil personnel perforated a relief well in an attempt to contain the On flow. January 20, of eight wells the remained on fire. Corexit 7664 dispersant was applied to the slick at a rate of 3 barrels per hour. operations began Response on moderating March 1. A Coast U.S. Guard cutter and helicopter were released from the scene. Shell Oil Co. officials were required to submit daily pollution reports to the U.S. Coast Guard Captain the of Port (COTP), New Orleans, in advance of any that operations may have increased Drilling, pollution. capping, and pumping of the wells continued throughout April. By April 16, estimated the rate of release was barrels 20 per day. The was slick reportedly staying within a 6-mile radius of the platform, with sheen extending to miles. 12 The slick was reduced to sheen during the following months as pumping and capping continued. operations Beach surveys conducted were by personnel from the Guard, Coast U.S. Shell Oil Co., the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries, and other local observers. The only shoreline oiling that resulted from incident the was between Caminada and Pass Bay Champagne. The case was closed by the Guard U.S. Coast on May 17, 1971. The explosion and subsequent fire killed four people and seriously burned 37 others. USCG district 8. [SEP] Several drilling rigs were constructed in an effort to contain the spilling oil. Salt water was pumped into the 21-B relief well starting December 30. Jet Barges and Jaraffe Adair Red pumped approximately million 19 gallons of water per day to cool the structure. The first of the relief wells, started on December 5, the reduced oil flow. Chemical dispersant spraying was started early in the response. Corexit 7664 was sprayed in the immediate and platform work areas to prevent oil slicks from developing. Slicks forming near the platform may have ignited, endangering response personnel. dispersant The concentration was not allowed to exceed 0.03 percent of the total spray stream, due to its toxic nature. The Regional Response concurred Team with the conditional use of dispersants. Shell Oil Herder was used aid to skimming operations two miles southwest of Belle Pass. Aerial application of the substance was also used along shoreline the from the west end of east Timbalier Island to miles 1.5 west Belle of Skimmers, Pass. straw, and boom were used to contain and collect oil when possible. Vacuum trucks recovered oil from Grand Isle Beach. Six truck loads of litter and gallons 600 of emulsion were picked up by January 15. [SEP] Well piping head was severely damaged by the intense heat of fire. the Shell Oil Co. personnel constructed an abrasive cutting boom to attempt to cut the damaged well head off of the B-8 well, which was bent into the water and partially submerged, causing a pollution problem. This device was used to the cut well heads off of B-3 and B-5. A sand blast cutting device was used to cut the piping of wells B-8 and B-28. Well heads B-17, B-15, and B-4 were cut by February 11. A [SEP] slick of burning oil spread 50 feet from the platform on the day of the incident. On December 21, a slick entering Timbalier Bay minimal caused beach impact. December pollution 28 surveys reported scattered four oil accumulations. accumulation One was observed at the southern end of Grand Isle and three were southwest Caminada of Pass. Sheen on the water surrounding the platform continued to dissipate. On January 13, oil along Isle Grand Beach was reported to be breaking up into globs and patches with the incoming A tide. 1.5-inch thick accumulation of oil was near observed the Grand Isle Beach jetty. A slick 10 feet and wide 6-12 thick inches floated the on water. By 20, January the slick extended miles two southwest of the fire, producing a fan of for rainbow sheen another six miles. of Streaks sheen extended for up to 29 miles southwest of the platform with a maximum width of four miles. Throughout February, March, April, and the slick became progressively smaller as it was driven by currents the and winds. By April, extensions of rainbow sheen were all that the remained of slick. [SEP] affected Shorelines included sand/gravel beaches and exposed rocky shores. ???€?IFP. [SEP] Platform on Databank Accidents to Drilling or Vessels Offshore Platforms (1955-1989). #7032. ???€?U.S. Coast Guard POLREP file
On January 28, 1969, the Union Company Oil well number 21 under Platform A, 5.5 located miles southeast of Santa California, Barbara, in the Dos Cuadras field, experienced a blowout while drill bits were being A changed. massive mixture of gas, oil, and drilling mud roared the drill up casing and spewed out onto the platform. Well A-21 was capped on February 7 with 13,000 barrels of heavy drilling mud. Oil continued to vent from natural faults several hundred yards from the platform, tract in 4042 between the coast and a chain of islands. The faults released a total of 100,000 barrels of oil until December 1969. A record-breaking storm immediately before the incident contributed to the large amount of oiled debris that needed to be collected as part of the sheen response. On February 2, the Pollution National Contingency Plan, instituted by President Johnson in 1968, went into for effect the first time. The Federal Water Control Pollution Administration was to on-scene monitor the well-killing process and cleanup. Red Adair was brought in to provide expertise the capping well. To aid in predicting the movement, National slick the Weather Service set up a local station to monitor winds tides. and Weather during the cleanup was except moderate for a storm on February 4 and 5 that temporarily halted cleanup by damaging booms that were protecting harbors and marinas. The majority of the cleanup was completed within 45 Commercial fishing days. was completely closed in the area February from until April. Although the environmental effects of the spill relatively were minimal, economic were effects extensive due to loss of fishing income, loss of recreational facilities, and failure to personal property. USCG district [SEP] 11. This was the worst incident involving an offshore platform to date in the United States. Residents of Santa Barbara were the in midst of a battle to stop drilling in this channel, famous for it's active oil seeps, when the accident Many occurred. people felt that not enough attention had been given to the environmental risks associated with in this drilling area. accident The have may not occurred if Union Oil had put steel casing the around hole to a of depth feet. 2,000 Even though this is a known unstable earthquake fault area, Union had received waiver a from Federal officials to case the well to only 238 feet. Media coverage was and high several protests and sit-ins resulted. incident This was also influential in the development of the National Environmental Policy Act, signed by President Nixon on January 1970. 1, [SEP] draft Final of Ashley Braun write up for 45th Anniversary. Loaded by Alan Mearns 45 after Years the Santa Barbara Oil Spill, Looking at a Historic Through Disaster Technology An aerial Santa view of Barbara Harbor coated with advancing the oil slick from Oil???€?s Union Platform ???€?A.???€? February 14, 1969. (University of California Santa Barbara Map and Image Library) JANUARY 28, -- 2014 Forty-five years ago, on January 28, 1969, bubbles of oil black and gas began rising up out of the blue waters near Santa Barbara, Calif. On that morning, Union Oil's new drilling rig Platform "A" experienced had a well blowout, and while spill responders were rushing to the scene of what would become a monumental oil and spill catalyzing moment the in environmental movement, the and tools technology available for dealing with this spill were quite different than today. The groundwork was still being laid for the digital, scientific mapping and data management tools now we employ without thought. second In 1969, many the of advances in this developing field were coming out of U.S. intelligence and military efforts during the Cold War, including a top-secret satellite reconnaissance project known as A CORONA. decade later NOAA's first oil spill modeling software, the On-Scene Spill Model (OSSM)(link is external) [PDF], was being written on the fly during the IXTOC I well blowout in the Gulf Mexico of in Information 1979. Geographic Systems (GIS) software didn???€?t begin to take root in university settings until the To mid-1980s. show how just far this technology has come in the past years, 45 we've mapped the Santa Barbara oil spill in Southwest ERMA, NOAA's online environmental remediation mapping tool for coastal California. In this GIS tool, you can see: The very approximate extent of the oiling. The location photos and of drilling the platform affected and resources (e.g., Santa Barbara Harbor). areas The where seabirds historically congregate. Seabirds, particularly gulls and grebes, especially hard were hit by this oil spill, with nearly 3,700 confirmed birds dead and many more likely unaccounted for. Even though well would the be after capped 11 a days, series of undersea faults opened up as a result of blowout, the continuing to release oil and gas until December 1969. As much as 4.2 gallons million of crude oil eventually gushed both from the well and the resulting faults. Oil from "A" Platform was found as far north as Pismo Beach and as far south as Left, Mexico. a view of Santa Barbara Channel with the location and a historical photo of Platform ???€?A???€? during the 1969 well blowout, as well as a rough approximation very the of the extent of oil spill, as viewed NOAA???€?s in online mapping tool, ERMA. Right, the of extent the oiling overlaid with different colors showing the abundance seabirds of during surveys from 1975-2008. (NOAA) Nowadays, we can map the precise location of a wide variety of data using a tool like ERMA, including photos aerial from surveys of slicks oil along flight the path in which they were collected. The closest responders could to come this in 1969 was this list of photos aerial of oil(link external) is a and printed chart with handwritten notes the on location of drilling platforms in Santa Barbara Channel. A list historical of overflight photos of the California coast and accompanying map of the oil in platforms the area of the Platform ???€?A???€? well blowout in early 1969. (Courtesy of the University of California Santa Barbara Map and Image Library) to Click view larger. A view of Santa Barbara Harbor today using NOAA's online mapping tool, ERMA, along a with historical photo of the harbor during the 1969 Platform "A" well (NOAA) blowout. Yet, this spill oil was notable for its technology use in one surprising way. It was the first time a CIA spy plane had ever been for used non-defense related aerial photography. While classified information at the time, the CIA and the U.S. Geological Survey were actually partnering to use a Cold War spy plane take to aerial photos of the Santa Barbara spill a (they used U-2 plane because they could get the images more quickly than the from passing CORONA spy satellite). But that information wasn't declassified until the 1990s(link is While external). one of the largest environmental disasters in U.S. waters, the legacy of the Santa Barbara oil spill lasting is and impressive and includes the creation of the National Policy Environmental U.S. Act, Environmental Protection Agency, and National Marine Sanctuaries system (which soon encompassed Channel California???€?s nearby Islands, which were affected by the Santa Another Barbara spill). legacy is the pioneering work long-time begun by spill responder, Alan A. who Allen, started his career at the 1969 Santa Barbara oil spill. He became known as the scientist who disputed Union Oil's initial spill volume estimates employing by methods still today used by NOAA. Author Easton Robert documents efforts Allen's the in book, Black tide: the Santa Barbara oil spill and its Others consequences: ... were questioning Union???€?s estimates. At General Corporation, Research a Santa Barbara firm, young a scientist who flew over slick the daily, Alan A. Allen, had become convinced that Union???€?s estimates of the escaping oil were about ten times low. too estimates Allen???€?s of oil-film thickness based were largely on the appearance of the slick from the air. Oil that had the characteristic dark color of crude oil was, he felt from confident studying records of other slicks, on the order of one thousandth an of inch or greater in thickness. Thinner would oil take on a dull gray or brown appearance, becoming iridescent around one hundred of thousandth an inch. Allen analyzed the slick in terms of thickness, area, and rate growth. of comparing By his data with slicks previous of known spillage, and considering many the factors that control the ultimate fate of oil on seawater, he that estimated leakage during first the days of the Santa Barbara spill could be conservatively estimated to at be least 5,000 (210,000 barrels gallons) per And day. in a lesson that history repeats itself: Platform "A" leaked 1,130 gallons of crude oil into Santa Barbara Channel 2008. in Our office modeled the path of the slicks oil that resulted. Learn more about how NOAA to responds oil spills today. Union Oil???€?s Platform surrounded ???€?A???€? by oil on February 14, 1969. On February 7, the well was capped with 13,000
On June 13, 2023, the USCG Sector Columbia River notified the SSC for the Northwest Pacific that the 47’ F/V Nadine is on taking off water the southern Oregon coast. Search and rescue operations rescued persons all on board. There max. is potential for 1200 gallons of and diesel 100 gallons of hydraulic fuel on board, no oil is observed to have released. A trajectory was requested.
On June 28, 2022, NOAA Fisheries received a report of a dead entangled killer whale floating approx. miles 30 offshore Southwest of Newport, Oregon contacted and the NOAA NW to SSC request a drift model to see if the whale will go ashore and where may they be able to locate it sampling. for
On November 2021, 29, the USCG Columbia Sector River IMD Astoria requested a trajectory of a partially afloat 50-gallon mystery drum adrift in the Columbia River. is There no visible sheen.
On September 9, 2020, USCG Sector Key West notified the Florida National Keys Marine Sanctuary that a 750 Propane Ft was adrift off of the Upper Keys. The tanker MT Monsoon was underway with tanks empty from Belgium to Houston when had it issues with saltwater contamination its of engines, losing propulsion. Notification only
On September 13, 2015, the USCG contacted NOAA ERD regarding a tanker adrift in North the side of Bay, Bristol Alaska. The vessel unmanned was and approximately 3 miles offshore. The USCG requested a vessel drift trajectory.
In the evening of 28-Feb-2013, the 628 foot M/V CHAMPION EXPRESS was reported adrift approximately 8NM West of Half Moon Bay, CA. The loaded bulk cargo ship carrying liquid had fertilizer reported engine an leak that forced engine an shutdown. At the time USCG contacted their NOAA SSC, she had been drifting for approximately 5 hours. A tug was en route at the time the of call and expected to be on-scene in hour so. an or USCG Sector SF requested a precautionary drift estimate of the ship in event the there is difficulty getting her under tow. pollution No has been reported or is anticipated this at time.
17DEC12, On MSU Morgan City contact NOAA scientific for support relating to a potential release of 1,000 gl of marine diesel from a MODU in distress. The tanker is located 14nm offshore, west of Marsh Island, Vermillion in Block 65. USCG is working salvage issues as well as marine pollution. USCG is seeking a and trajectory fate analysis if all diesel were released.
At 2047 hours (Pacific) Sector USCG Francisco San contacted the NOAA SSC to request a drift estimate for the inbound M/V Pacific Sea, a 623 foot cargo bulk carrier that had lost and propulsion adrift approximately 17nm Southwest of Point Arena, CA. Attempts are presently underway to get her under tow. She is accompanied by tow a vessel the and USCG Cutter Sockeye. Sector San Francisco requested a estimate. drift
An unmanned US-flagged barge carrying 140,000 gallons of aviation fuel broke free from the US-flagged Vessel Towing in SINUK the Bering Straits near the Diomede Islands. The tug has been unable to reacquire the barge due to weather conditions (46 mph winds, foot 10-15 seas). The Towing Vessel SINUK is shadowing the and barge providing hourly updates on position, weather, intentions. and The US-flagged Towing Vessel is SIKU enroute to nearby Wales, AK to provide additional support if needed. NOAA standing ERD is by to provide scientific support include vessel drift information. The freely drifting barge was successfully guided south the through Bering Straits where the SIKU able was corral to the barge successfully and tow it to Port Clarence for repairs and services. Case closed.
A 36' yacht hand grouded off Wassaw Sound GA during bad Vessel weather. had 170 of gallons gasoline. persons ALl rescued and under vessel tow back to safe harbor. [SEP] Google Map of grounding site [SEP] Date: 1930 EDT, Saturday, Februrary 28, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Jim Jeansonne FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: 36 foot yacht aground in Savana River FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, CONTACT PLEASE Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION NOAA, STUDIES, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A 36 foot yacht ran aground at around 1600-1700 EDT near buoy 22 off Wassaw Sound. It was hard aground and carrying about 170 gal. gasoline. As of 1750 EDT vessel was under tow by SeaTow. The location was given as 31??55.895'N--087??57.776'W, is and 3/4 of a Mile more or from shoreline in all directions. If any of this information initial is incorrect, please us let ASAP know as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ Winds 1) Forecast Tornado watch in effect untill 3am EST Sunday. craft Small advisory in effect from midnight tonight through monday afternoon. Tonight: Winds for the SW 15 to 20 knots increasing to 20 to 25 knots with gust up to 30 knots late. Sunday: Winds from the SW at 20 to 25 knots with gusts up to to 30 knots 2) Trajectory Analysis Gasoline is a very light and fuel will evaporate and disperse rapidly. In the strong winds, and waves, expect we any spilled fule disperse to very quickly, probably not leaving even visible a sheen for of any length time. That ship locatio is almost a mile from shore, we so do ecpect not any shoreline at contact all. 3) Resources at risk With the strong winds, much of the fuel spilled is likely to be into dispersed the water column. This can create a toxic hazard, but will it be highly localized. Some local biota could be in killed a small area. It is unlikely that any effects will be noticable in the longer term. 4) Oil Fate Gasoline is light a refined product with a specific gravity that can range from 0.76 to 0.70 at 15??C (54 to 70 API). The product typically has very a high evaporation rate and not does tend to persistent create slicks. For release a this small, in open water conditions and with wind speeds than greater 10 knots, 90% of the gasoline is expected to evaporate within the first 1 hour or sooner of initial the release. When spilled, the gasoline spreads quickly into thin by films patches forming of rainbow and silver sheens. If the sheens reach the in shoreline a few hours, a slight staining, or greasy film is common. Normally, this type of does release not become an involved cleanup problem. There is a high flammability hazard associated with gasoline spills. Specifically, if a release is kept from spreading freely by natural or man-made structures the gasoline slick might enough be thick to support ignition. In addition, vapor concentrations the near source of spill or vapors collected in sheltered areas can present an explosion hazard. Please note that gasoline does have a high relatively concentration of aromatic light compounds and tends to be more soluble and more toxic heavier then oils. In high energy the environments, gasoline is likely to disperse as small droplets in the water column. Gasoline spills can result in an initial toxic shock to and biota as persist a biological threat, particularly low in energy marine environments such shallow as and bays inlets.
Olympic The Coast National Marine Sanctuary notified the NOAA SSC about at noon on June that 14 the 27,000 ton Tanker Ioannis 1 was adrift NM 28 southwest of Buoy J off the northwest of shore Washington. The vessel, heading south Vancouver, from B.C., had shut down it's engines for repairs. The tanker was reported to be carrying methyl glycol. The Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary requested drift a trajectory for the vessel. The vessel restarted its engines and was underway again by the afternoon June of 14.
On 21Feb08 at 1030, the SSC was notified by the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary a of 38ft. private sailing vessel adrift miles 1.5 off the central California coast near Lopez Point. The skipper called a may day and was airlifted off the vessel by the USCG. vessel The is adrift with sails torn and no anchor. [SEP] S/V CENTRAL SADI, COAST, CA 1430 PST 21, 2008 February This is a forecast site-specific from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. (2/21): Sunset 1755 PST Sunrise (2/22): 0651 PST Sunset (2/22): 1756 PST 36 Hour Forecast and extended Winds: Thursday: S-SE winds 18-22 with knots gust to 30 knots. Thursday night: S winds knots becoming 20-25 W at 5-15 knots midnight. after Friday: W winds at 10-15 knots. Saturday: S-SE winds at 30-35 Sunday: knots. W winds knots. 15-25 Waves (combined seas): Thursday: W swell at 6-8 feet. Friday: NW swell at 10-12 feet. Saturday: NW swell at feet. 14-16 Sunday: W swell at 18-21 feet Precipitation: Thursday: chance of showers. Friday: Saturday: showers. chance of rain. Sunday: showers likely. [SEP] portions of Selected siituation updates by provided Kathey Scott (MBNMS) 22FEB2008: on The 38-ft S/V SADIE (CF8587KY) went adrift on February 21 after its sails were damaged in heavy weather and the malfunctioned. engine Coast Guard Sector San mounted Francisco a vigorous rescue by remediation air sea and units and lifted the two POB from the vessel, leaving the vessel adrift without a crew. A Coast Guard helicopter fixed the position of the vessel approximately 1/2 mile offshore of Grimes Point first at light on February 22, and Vessel Assist, a contract towing service, to deployed take the vessel in tow. The California Fish & Game P/B SWORDFISH arrived on scene and monitored the status of the SADIE, was which held in place by a parted anchor chain that had snagged on the seafloor. Vessel Before could Assist arrive, the sea forced the anchor chain loose, and the SADIE drifted into the shoreline, grounding upright, high on rocks, at the base of a 600-ft steep coastal bluff. The went vessel aground 1/3 mile south of Grimes Point on the Big Sur Coast (36deg 12.15'N, 121deg 43.83'W) at approximately 1130 (PST), hours Friday, February 22, 2008. Seas on scene were reported at 8 - 10 feet with overcast skies and intermittent squalls. rain A salvage technician swam ashore and inspected vessel, the that reporting the hull had sustained several punctures was and unfit for re- floating. Vessel Assist left the scene. The wreck site is accessible by but foot, not by vehicle. A strong front storm is expected move to through the area over the next 24 hours and will likely vessel, destroy the the releasing 20-30 gallons of diesel from the vessel's fuel tank. Coast Guard Sector San Francisco has notified been of the grounding and potential spill. Grounding reports have been filed with the NRC (863126 and 863015) and the California Office of Emergency Services Warning Center (report #08-1485). The owner vessel does not have insurance on the boat or available funds to remove the vessel fuel the or from wreck site. The Monterey Bay National Sanctuary Marine has queried Guard the regarding possible Coast action by Federal the On Scene Coordinator Representative to remove fuel from the vessel. At 1650 hours today (22FEB2008) that an Incident Management Team is deploying to Monterey this evening. They meet will up with the vessel owner (Feb tomorrow 23) and the inspect wreck site to determine if fuel can be removed from the SADIE in a safe manner. Weather are conditions expected to worsen tonight, and rains could access make down the trails foot of the 600-ft steep slope untenable. The FOSCR will determine next steps following a survey of the area. [SEP] TIME: PST 1430 Thursday, February 21, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: NOAA Office Response of and Restoration Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 Drifting SUBJECT: Sailboat off Lopez, Pt. CA additional For information, please contact Chris Barker, NOAA Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. (206) Phone: 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your request, we have looked the at of trajectory a drifting off sailboat Pt. CA.. Lopez, These estimates are based on the following information: The USCG removed the operator of a ft 38 sailing 1210 vessel at today, at location 36??0.9'N, 121??35.9'W, 1-1/2 about miles off Pt Lopez, CA. The vessel is currently adrift, with sails up but The torn. USCG reported it was drifting the to NW, and they placed a locater beacon on vessel. the If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, as would it affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WINDS: Thursday: S-SE winds 18-22 knots with gust to 30 knots. Thursday night: S winds 20-25 knots becoming at W 5-15 knots midnight. after Friday: W winds at 10-15 2) knots. The TRAJECTORY: vessel's drift will be by governed the winds and coastal currents. Examination of the HF radar currents generated by the California Ocean Observing System indicate that there is a small upcoast of current about 0.1knots in that location at this time. With these small currents, the movement will be dominated by the winds. The observations from this afternoon, and the forecast about until midnight tonight, indicate South Southeast winds, which will tend to move the parallel vessel to the coast. It hard is to know how it fast will without move more detail about the condition of the vessel. However, as the orientation of the coastline shifts, it is possible that the vessel could be beached somewhere South of Pt. Sur before midnight. is It hard to know how fast it will move without more detail the about condition of the vessel. After midnight, the wind is expected to shift to be stronger and from West, the which will move the vessel toward shore, probably beaching it within a few hours of the wind shift. We expect the vessel beached to be Friday by early morning, somewhere within ten miles of so of pt. Sur. A more accurate estimate may be able to be produced if we can get data from the locater beacon on board the vessel.
The NOAA was SSC notified of a ship fishing that had capsized and was adrift near Santa Cruz Island, CA. An estimated 200 gallons diesel of were on board when she capsized and sheen was observed by USCG during operations. rescue The drift trajectory may take vessel the The aground. vessel is reported to the be in Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary. The Island is managed by the National Park Service. USCG requested weather support. [SEP] Attached is the afternoon incident brief for RRT-9 members, prepared by USCG District-11 staff. J Stout, SSC California [SEP] The following is a status brief of F/V the Five incident Gs provided by USCG District 11 staff on 14 July, 2006 (pictures and removal plan are separate Hotline postings): F/V FIVE Gs INCIDENT BRIEF -- SANTA CRUZ ISLAND, CA, 14 JUL 06, 1400 Vessel Length: Particulars 35 ft Hull Type: Type Aluminum of fuel: diesel and lube Potential petroleum o/b: 200 gallons Vessel's Position (see pictures) attach <<MVC-652X.JPG>> <<MVC-646X.JPG>> 01.00N 34 * * 37.33W 119 * (vsl is capsized, 50 offshore ft Chinese Harbor, Santa Cruz Island: National Sanctuary) Marine * Vessel boomed anchored and Current Situation (Actions Taken) * Halibut CGC o/s MSD with Santa Barbara * NRC scene on with Boats and C for Divers salvage operations * Salvage plan was submitted and approved * NRC is preparing for fuel removal On Scene WX and 24 WX HR Forecast * HI tide 1328 = 4.02' , 0036 = 4.80' * Low tide 0715 = (1.2') 1854 = 1.81' * Low cloud cover * West Today: winds 10-20 kts, patchy fog in the * morning. Seas 4-5 Plans ft * Remove fuel Float * boat * Remove debris * Secure nets * Tow boat to Santa Barbara (see attach Removal Plan) <<NRCES Five MV G'S Plan.pdf>> [SEP] Wide angle view Five of F/V Gs grounded Santa near Cruz Island prior to booming and removal operations. Note net spool on aft deck and floating debris vessel surrounding Photo provided by JStout, SSC USCG. California [SEP] Oblique aerial photo of the F/V Five Gs taken 2006 13 July, by USCG helicopter crewmember. JStout, SSC [SEP] California Closer view of F/V Five Gs grounded near Santa Cruz Island prior to booming and removal operations. Note floating debris surrounding vessel. Photo provided by USCG. JStout, SSC California [SEP] Initial report, 12 2006 July On 11 July, the US Coast Guard responded to a call involving the 35 foot F/V Five Gs, whose nets were when deployed she started taking water over the stern capsized and near Santa Cruz Island. three The attempted crewmembers to swim to shore but only one survived and was rescued. The USCG located the floating, yet overturned vessel and noted sheen and debris floating nearby. A self-locating data buoy was to attached the hull and the vessel's drift was tracked to a location near the shoreline of Chinese Harbor, Santa Cruz Island (34deg 01.02'N, 119deg 37.33'W). When interviewed, owner the claimed that the vessel had a maximum fuel capacity of 400 gallons but estimated approximately 200 gallons diesel of aboard were at the time of the mishap. the Because vessel's condition and potential threat pollution are currently unknown, a patrol boat has been dispatched and a overflight helicopter scheduled is for tomorrow at first light. on Based the morning scene assessment, removal alternatives will be evaluated by USCG, the State of Channel California, Islands NMS and Islands Channel NP. WX support was requested by the USCG. Jordan Stout, SSC California [SEP] Drifting F/V Vessel Five Gs 0000 PDT, Thursday, July 13, NOTE: 2006 This a is site specific forecast from the National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunrise (7/13): 5:56 a.m. Sunset (7/13): 8:13 p.m Sunrise (7/14): 5:57 a.m. Sunset (7/14): 8:12 p.m ** Warnings and Notes** Occasional Dense patchy fog. ************** 36 Hour Forecast. -------------------------- Winds and Precipitation: Today -- W winds 10 to 15, up then to 20 kt. in the afternoon. Patchy fog in the morning. Tonight -- winds W 10 to 20 kt., strongest in the late afternoon. Patchy fog after about 3:00am. Friday -- winds W about 10 in kt. the morning, then 10 20 to with kt. gusts to 25 kt.in the afternoon. Patchy in fog the Friday morning. night -- W winds 10 20 to kt. Dense patchy fog after midnight. Waves: and Today tonight -- Seas ft. Friday 2-3 and Friday night -- Seas 4-5 ft.
F/V Blue 166 North, ft steel hull catcher processor, is disabled and adrift approximately 25 nm of west Unalaska Island. The vessel's single screw is fouled with unknown amount of line. The ship has 33,000 approximately gallons of 500 diesel, gallons of lube petroleum 11 and people on board. The location approximate of the vessel as of 31 at MAR 0600 Alaska local was time 53 deg 37.88N, 167 deg 50.31W. [SEP] The M/V James Dunlap, a 4000 hp tug dispatched from Dutch Harbor able was to intersect the Blue North 6 n.m. from the Unalaska coastline, attach a line, towing and tow it to Harbor Dutch and safety. Once there the vessel was taken to Magone Marine for Services repairs. Case closed.
The F/V Northern a Orion, 165' vessel, is in dead the water off northern Oregon about 18-20 miles off Clatsop Spit. The vessel has approximately 20,000 of gallons diesel fuel onboard. [SEP] Date; Jan 10, 2006 1130 PST To: NOAA SSC Demain Bailey FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Division Response Modeling and Studies, Simulation WA Seattle, 98115 SUBJECT: Northern F/V Orion off adrift Oregon FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, SEATTLE, NOAA, WA 98115. (206) _______________________________________________________ 526-4911. The reported scenario: The F/V Northern Orion, a 165' vessel, is dead in water the off northern Oregon 18-20 about miles off Clatsop Spit. The location is reported to be 46?? 06.201'N by 124?? 28.363' W. vessel The has approximately 20,000 gallons of diesel onboard. fuel If any of this initial information is incorrect, please us let know ASAP as it would affect the trajectory. _______________________________________________________ 1) Wind Forecast afternoon: This 10-15 from knots SW the 15-20 Tonight: knots from the SW Tomorrow: 15-20 from the W 2) Trajectory Analysis Currents on the inner half of the shelf are toward the north at 1/3 to 1/2 knot. We expect the vessel to move the to NE the toward Washington coast with the forecast winds and currents. If the vessel is high in the water and the winds are stronger than expected, the vessel could landfall soon after midnight tonight between Cape Disappointment and Long If Beach. the vessel is lower in the water or the are winds the on less than forecast, expected landfall is noon between tomorrow tomorrow and evening, anywhere Ocean from Park to the entrance to Willapa Bay. Note: The trajectory can refined be with additional drift information over time. 3) Oil Fate Given the sea state, a discharge of 20,000 gallons of diesel will disperse A quickly. sheen of 2-3 miles, for persisting 4-6 hours is what we expect. would ADIOS II Oil Fate estimate: To view table properly use fixed width font like monaco. Oil Name = DIESEL FUEL OIL API = 38.8 Pour = Point -33 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = 10 ft ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining gal Spill percent percent percent 1 20,000 7 5 2 88 20,000 16 18 67 3 20,000 22 39 39 4 20,000 25 61 5 14 20,000 26 72 [SEP] F/V 2 Northern Orion: 20 miles off Oregon Coast 1100 PST, 10, Tuesday, Jan NOTE: 2006 This is site a specific forecast from National Service the Weather generated for specifically this incident region. Sunset (1/10): 4:53pm Sunrise (1/11): 7:58am Sunset (1/11): 4:54pm **WARNINGS** Small craft advisory in through effect Wednesday evening. ************ 36 Hour forecast: Winds Precipitation: and Today: SW 25 wind to 30 kt. Easing to 10 to 15 kt this afternoon. Wind waves 4 to 5 ft. W swell 20 ft at 12-15 seconds. Rain. Tonight: SW 15 wind to 20 kt with gusts to 25. Wind waves 6 W ft. swell 15 to 20 ft at 13 seconds. Rain. Wednesday: W wind 15 to 20 kt with gusts to 25. waves Wind 4 ft. swell W 15 ft at 12 seconds. Rain likely. Wednesday Night: SW wind 10 to kt. 15 Wind waves 2-3 ft. W swell 15 ft. Chance of Thursday: showers. SE wind 20 to 25 Wind kt. 5 waves ft. W swell 12 ft. Rain likely. Thursday Night: wind S 25 to 30 kt with gusts to 35 Combined kt. seas ft. 14 Rain likely. Friday: S wind 20 to 25 kt with gusts to 35 kt. Wind waves 7 ft. SW swell 15 ft. Saturday: SW wind 25 to 30 kt with gusts to 35 kt. Combined seas 20 to ft. 25
Sector Portland reported that at 1400 approximately Friday November 11 the crabbing 60 foot vessel F/V Bold Contender was floating upside down about 2 nm offshore of Depoe Bay at Cape Foulweather with a potential of 6000 gallons of diesel and 300 gallons of hydraulic product onboard. [SEP] Sector Portland reported that at approximately 1400 November Friday 11 the 60 foot crabbing vessel F/ V Contender Bold was floating upside down about 2 nm offshore of Depoe Bay at Cape Foulweather with a potential of gallons of 6000 diesel and 300 gallons of hydraulic oil onboard. Reported coordinates were 44 45.98 N 124 and W. 07.0 A light sheen observed was in the vicinity of the vessel. Based on the weather forecast, NOAA ORR estimated that the vessel, if remained it afloat, would ground to the somewhere north Cascade between Head and Cape Lookout before noon on Saturday November 12. Model results indicated but all approximately 15% the of fuel diesel would evaporate and disperse within 4 hours of a catastrophic release under current weather conditions. USCG [SEP] A overflight at first light on Saturday morning 11/12 indicated the vessel F/V Bold Contender sank offshore some time during the night, leaving behind a small debris field. [SEP] A hotline has opened been to capture information related to the FV Bold Contender, Offshore City, Lincoln OR incident.
Sector Tampa asked for trajectory the for F/V Mr Natural had which been adrift since 26 30 Aug miles south of Cape Romano. Position of the craft on 31 Aug at hrs 1950 was 27-17.8N; 082-59.6W Vessel had max of 4000 gallons of diesel on board. NOAA provided some info as to expected drift track the of vessel and trajectory crude of is 4000 gal was released well as as wx forecast. [SEP] A Hotline has been opened to capture information related to the FV Mr Natural, South of Cape Romano, FL [SEP] incident. MR F/V NATURAL, OFFSHORE TAMPA FOM BAY, FL 1200 Friday EDT, September 2, 2005 Sunset 1951 (9/02): Sunrise (9/03): 0712 Sunset (9/03): 1950 ________________________________ 36 Hour Forecast Winds: Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted to be from the NE 10-15 at knots. Saturday, the winds are expected to continue from the NE at 10-15 knots. _________________________ Seas: Today through Saturday, the swell are to forecast be 2-3 feet. _________________________ Precipitation: Tonight through Saturday, no precipitation is forecast the in region. _________________________________ Ceiling/Visibility: Tonight through Friday, clear skies are expected. _________________________________ Temperatures: are Temperatures expected from range to highs in the low 90???€?s to lows in the low 70???€?s. _________________________________ Extended Forecast: Sunday, NE winds at 10-15. Clear skies. No precipitation is forecast. Monday, winds NE at 10-15. Clear skies. precipitation No is forecast. Tuesday, NE winds at 10-15. skies. Clear No precipitation forecast. is [SEP] Date: EDT 1400 September 2, 2005 To: NOAA Brad SSC Benggio FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Simulation Studies Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: F/V Mr Natural, adrift offshore Sarasota Bay, FOR FL ADDITIONAL PLEASE INFORMATION, CONTACT CJ Beegle-Krause AND MODELING SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. PHONE (206) 526-4911. ______________________________________________________ We have looked at the trajectory implications of a drifting vessel offshore Sarasota Bay FL. These notes are based on the following information: The F/V Mr Natural reported was adrift since 26 2005 August 30 nm south of Cape Romano. On 31 1950 August hours the vessel was reported at 27o 17.8???€?N, 082 o 59.6???€?W; today at 0830 hours the vessel was at 12.416???€?N, reported 27o o 082 53.367???€?W. Maximum potential fuel onboard reported is to be gallons 4,000 of diesel. If of any this initial information incorrect, is please let us know ASAP, as it would affect any trajectory implications. ______________________________________________________ 1) 24-hour Wind Forecast Today through Tonight, the winds are predicted be to from the NE at 10-15 knots. Saturday, the winds are expected continue from to the NE at 10-15 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY The vessel is drifting currently at slightly more than 0.2 knots downcoast. We expect the vessel to continue to move downcoast, about covering 5.2 nm day, per and staying outside the 10 fathom isobath. If the were fuel lost from vessel, the a sheen extending downwind and downcurrent could be for visible most at 1/2 nm. lost Any fuel is not expected to reach the coast. 3) OIL FATE Diesel refined Light such products, as Fuel diesel Oil (or No 2), typically have very high evaporation rates and do not tend to create persistent slicks. However, the terminology for refined is products standardized, not and, sometimes, heavier intermediate fuel oils are referred to as ???€?marine diesel???€?. These heavier products are much less volatile than normal Fuel Oil no 2 and can form a more persistent slick. When spilled, the diesel spreads quickly thin into films often forming patches of rainbow and silver sheens. Note that lighter refined products do a have relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds and tend to be more soluble and more toxic than heavier oils. Oil Name DIESEL = FUEL OIL (SOUTHERN USA 1997) API 37.6 = Pour Point = 7 deg F Wind Speed = constant at 15 knots Wave Height = computed from Water winds Temperature = 75 Time deg F of Initial Release = 2, September 1100 Total hours Amount of Oil = Released 4,000 gal ______________________________________________________________________ Hours Into Released Evaporated Dispersed Remaining Spill gal percent percent percent 1 4,000 - 9 - - 6 84 2 4,000 18 21 60 3 4,000 - 24 - 41 - 34 4 4,000 27 57 16 5 4,000 - 28 - 64 - 8
On 28, October 2022, USCG Sector VA notified the NOAA SSC that the F/V TREMONT, a 114.5 foot, GT 399 vessel sank at 0400 approx. 55 NM SE of Assateague Island,, Virginia. The vessel has a total diesel fuel capacity of approx. 31,000 gallons well as as machinery lube oil onboard. The cause of the casualty under is The investigation. VA Sector FOSCR requested a discharge trajectory worst-case for possible shoreline impact and resources at risk be conducted for the formulation of their response strategy.
On June 14, 2016, the USCG Sector Hampton Roads notified the SSC NOAA that a Navy MH 60 helicopter Seahawk crashed into the James river about 1.5 miles north the of James river bridge. All 3 occupants rescued. were The aircraft had approximately 400 gallons of JP 5 fuel on at board the time of crash.
On May 23, 2016, the USCG Sector Honolulu the notified NOAA SSC for Oceania that a small 4-passenger Cessna aircraft is in the water about 100 yards off the south end of Makaha Beach on the west of side Oahu, Hawaii. The aircraft is reported to have 50 gallons Jet of A onboard. fuel No oil has been reported released or in observed the water. The aircraft is intact and has been anchored position. in NOAA trustees notified. were
On May 6, 2016, A military jet crashed off Wrightsville Beach, NC at 4:45pm. USCG Sector North Carolina notified NOAA SSC 7:45 at pm. Aircraft reported have to 1600 gallons of JP-5 on board. USCG trajectory. requested
On 8 August 2013, USCG Sector West Key contacted NOAA ERD regarding a small plane crash 1.4 approximately miles off Isla Morada, FL (25-18N 80-18W). The plane crashed at approximately 1630 local time and an had estimated capacity fuel 26 of gallons of 80/87 Octane fuel. The USCG requested fate and trajectory of the fuel.
small single engine aircraft crashed near shoreline afternoon early June 23 2013 at Dorado Beach, Puerto Rico. Reported fuel onboard was 30 gallons of 100 octane PRDNER avgas. reports plane is on a reef and pilot was taken to hospital. USCG investigators are enroute to scene. PRDNER and NMFS, USFWS have been notified.
On MSU 17DEC12, Morgan contact City NOAA for scientific support relating to a potential release of 1,000 gl of marine diesel from a MODU in distress. boat The is located 14nm offshore, west of Marsh Island, in Vermillion Block USCG 65. is working salvage issues as well as marine pollution. USCG is seeking a trajectory fate and if analysis all diesel were released.
At approximately 1700hrs on 18MAY2011 a Boeing 707 military refueling airplane crashed at the end of the runway at Naval Air Station Point Mugu. All crewmembers and survived the aircraft burned for a number hours. of Initial indicated reports none that of approx the 25,000 gallons JP-8 of jet fuel on-board had reached the Ocean. The next morning it became apparent that some of the had JP-8 marsh entered the area adjacent to the crash site and at 0830hrs on 19MAY2011 product was observed in the tidal channel under L (approx Avenue 1/3 mile from crash site). Navy Region Southwest and USCG MSD Santa Barbara contacted the NOAA SSC to request information on petroleum persistence the in marsh complex and support. trajectory
A small plane crash-landed near the mouth of the Columbia River in the vicinity of Pier 17, Astoria, OR late in the day 24APR2009. on No has pollution been observed thus far, but the aircraft was reported to be carrying 240 approximately gallons Jet-A of fuel on board. USCG Sector Portland requested a estimate trajectory in the event of a fuel release. News reports indicate that are attempts being made to recover the aircraft from the water. [SEP] April 23, Date: 2009 To: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division Modeling and Studies, Simulation Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: Potential 240 gallon Jet A sheen in Lower Columbia River FOR INFORMATION, ADDITIONAL PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. (206) _______________________________________________________ 526-4911. The reported scenario: An experimental aircraft 240 with gallons of jet A crash-landed in the Columbia River near Astoria, OR 46?? at 11.4'N by 123?? 49.4'W. This near the Columbia River Museum. Maritime If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. 1) _______________________________________________________ Weather Forecast Tonight are winds to expected be knots from 5-10 NE Saturday expected winds are to be 5 - 15 knots from the WNW Saturday night winds are expected to be 5 - 15 knots from the WNW. 2) Trajectory A Analysis spill of 240 gallons of Jet A tonight under wind NE conditions will result a in light sheen that will spread along Astoria the (south the bank of river). During the evening flood the sheen would about extend 1/2 mile upriver the (to and E), during the early morning ebb the sheen would extend about 1 to 1.5 miles the to west. We do not expect the sheen to persist for more than 12 hours (one ebb and one flood cycle) A spill of 240 gallons of Jet A under tomorrow WNW wind conditions will result in a light that sheen will spread along the (south Astoria bank of the river). During the morning flood the sheen would extend about 1 mile upriver (to the E), and during the the ebb sheen would about extend 1 miles to the west. We do not expect the sheen to persist for more than 6 hours (one ebb or one flood cycle) 3) Oil Fate ADIOS From II model for Jet A fuel. Under knot 5 winds less than 10% fuel after remaining 12 hours Under 10 knot winds less than 10% fuel remaining after 6 hours Under 15 knots winds less 10% than fuel remaining after 3 hours [SEP] The red "X" on the attached NOAA Chart (No. marks 18003) the location reported of the small airplane crash site as relayed by the Sector Portland personnel. [SEP] Photo of the plane downriver. floating Photo from the Daily Astorian website [SEP] Removal operations occured one day the plane after crash-landed. Photo of the plane de-watering during the removal operations. Photo the from Astorian Daily website. [SEP] Photo of plane shortly crash-landing after in the River. Columbia Photo is from the KVAL website.
A 36' yacht grouded hand off Sound Wassaw GA during bad weather. Vessel had 170 gallons of gasoline. ALl persons rescued and tanker tow under back to safe harbor. [SEP] Google Map of grounding site [SEP] Date: 1930 EDT, Saturday, Februrary 28, 2009 To: NOAA SSC Jim Jeansonne FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Materials Response Division and Modeling Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA 98115 SUBJECT: 36 foot yacht aground in Savana River FOR ADDITIONAL PLEASE INFORMATION, CONTACT Chris Barker, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, 98115. WA (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A 36 foot yacht ran aground at around 1600-1700 near EDT buoy 22 off Wassaw Sound. It was hard aground and carrying about 170 gal. gasoline. As of 1750 EDT vessel was under by tow SeaTow. The location was given as 31??55.895'N--087??57.776'W, and is 3/4 a of Mile or more from shoreline in all directions. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Winds Forecast Tornado watch in effect untill 3am EST Sunday. Small craft advisory in from effect midnight tonight through monday afternoon. Tonight: Winds for the SW 15 to 20 knots increasing to 20 to 25 with knots gust up to 30 knots late. Sunday: Winds from the SW 20 at to 25 knots with up gusts to to knots 30 2) Trajectory Analysis Gasoline is a very light fuel and will evaporate disperse and rapidly. In the strong winds, and waves, expect we any spilled fule to disperse very quickly, probably not leaving even a visible sheen for any length time. of That locatio ship is a almost mile shore, from we so not do ecpect any shoreline contact at 3) all. Resources risk at With the strong winds, much of the spilled fuel is likely be to dispersed into the water column. This can create a toxic hazard, but it will be highly localized. local Some could biota be killed in a small area. It is unlikely that effects any be will noticable in the longer term. 4) Fate Oil Gasoline is a light refined product with a specific gravity that can range from 0.76 to 0.70 at 15??C (54 to 70 API). The product typically has a very high rate evaporation and does tend not to create persistent slicks. For a release this small, in open water conditions and with wind speeds greater than 10 90% knots, of the gasoline is to expected evaporate within the first hour 1 or of sooner the initial release. When spilled, the gasoline spreads quickly into thin films by forming patches rainbow of and sheens. silver If the sheens reach shoreline the in a few a hours, slight staining, or greasy film common. is Normally, this type of release does not become an involved problem. cleanup There is a high flammability hazard associated with gasoline spills. Specifically, if a release is kept from spreading freely natural by or structures man-made the slick gasoline might be thick enough to support ignition. In addition, vapor concentrations near the source of spill or vapors collected in sheltered areas can present an hazard. explosion Please note that gasoline does a have relatively high concentration of light aromatic compounds tends and to be more soluble and more then toxic heavier oils. In high energy environments, the gasoline is likely to disperse as small droplets the in column. water Gasoline spills can result in an initial toxic shock to biota persist and as a biological threat, particularly in low marine energy environments such as shallow bays and inlets.
On 21Feb08 at 1030, the SSC was notified by the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary of a 38ft. private sailing vessel adrift 1.5 miles off the central California coast near Lopez The Point. skipper called a may day and was airlifted off the vessel by the USCG. The vessel is adrift with torn sails and no anchor. [SEP] S/V SADI, CA CENTRAL COAST, 1430 PST February 21, 2008 is This a site-specific forecast from the NOAA National Weather Service for the incident area. Sunset (2/21): 1755 PST Sunrise (2/22): 0651 Sunset (2/22): PST 1756 36 PST Forecast Hour extended and Winds: Thursday: S-SE winds 18-22 with gust knots to 30 knots. Thursday night: S winds 20-25 knots W becoming at 5-15 knots midnight. after Friday: W winds at knots. 10-15 Saturday: S-SE winds 30-35 at knots. Sunday: W winds 15-25 knots. Waves (combined seas): Thursday: W swell at 6-8 feet. Friday: NW swell at 10-12 feet. NW Saturday: swell at 14-16 feet. Sunday: W swell at 18-21 feet Precipitation: Thursday: chance of showers. Friday: showers. Saturday: chance of rain. Sunday: likely. [SEP] showers portions Selected of siituation updates provided by Scott (MBNMS) Kathey on 22FEB2008: 38-ft The SADIE S/V (CF8587KY) adrift went February on 21 its were after sails damaged in heavy weather and engine the malfunctioned. Coast Guard Sector San Francisco mounted a vigorous rescue by cleanup air and units sea and lifted the two from POB vessel, the the leaving vessel adrift without a crew. A Coast helicopter Guard fixed the position of the vessel approximately 1/2 mile offshore of Grimes Point at first light on February 22, and Vessel Assist, a contract towing service, deployed to take the in vessel tow. The California Fish & Game P/B SWORDFISH on arrived scene monitored and the status of the SADIE, which was held in by place a parted anchor chain that had snagged on the seafloor. Vessel Before Assist could arrive, the sea forced the anchor chain and loose, the SADIE drifted into the shoreline, grounding upright, high on rocks, at the base of a steep 600-ft coastal bluff. vessel The went aground 1/3 mile south Grimes of Point the on Big Sur Coast (36deg 121deg 12.15'N, 43.83'W) approximately at 1130 hours (PST), Friday, February 22, 2008. Seas on scene were reported at 8 - 10 feet with overcast skies and intermittent squalls. rain A salvage technician swam ashore and inspected the vessel, reporting that the hull had sustained several punctures and was unfit for re- floating. Vessel Assist left the scene. The site wreck is accessible by but foot, not by vehicle. A strong storm front is expected to move through the area over the next 24 hours and will likely destroy the vessel, the releasing 20-30 gallons of diesel from the vessel's fuel tank. Coast Guard Sector Francisco San has been of notified the grounding and potential spill. Grounding reports have been with filed the NRC (863126 and 863015) and the California Office of Emergency Warning Services Center (report #08-1485). The vessel owner does not have insurance on the boat or available funds to remove the fuel or vessel the from wreck site. The Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary has queried the Coast regarding Guard possible action by the Federal On Scene Coordinator Representative to remove fuel from the vessel. At 1650 hours today (22FEB2008) that an Incident Management Team is deploying to Monterey evening. this They will meet up with the vessel owner tomorrow 23) (Feb and inspect the wreck site to determine if fuel can be removed the from SADIE in a safe manner. Weather conditions are expected to worsen tonight, and rains could make down access the foot of trails the steep 600-ft slope untenable. The FOSCR will determine next steps following survey of a the area. [SEP] TIME: 1430 PST February Thursday, 21, 2008 TO: NOAA SSC Jordan Stout FROM: Office NOAA of Response Restoration and Emergency Response Division Seattle, WA 98115 Drifting SUBJECT: Sailboat off Pt. Lopez, CA For additional information, please contact Chris NOAA Barker, Emergency Response Division, Seattle, WA. Phone: (206) 526-4911. _______________________________________________________ Per your we have request, looked at the trajectory of a drifting sailboat off Pt. Lopez, CA.. These estimates are based the on following information: The USCG removed operator the of a 38 ft sailing vessel at 1210 today, location at 36??0.9'N, 121??35.9'W, about 1-1/2 miles off Pt Lopez, CA. The vessel is currently adrift, with sails up but torn. The USCG reported it was drifting to the NW, and placed they a locater the beacon on If vessel. of any initial this information is incorrect, please let us know ASAP, it as would any affect trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) WINDS: S-SE Thursday: winds 18-22 knots with to gust 30 knots. Thursday night: S winds 20-25 knots becoming W at 5-15 knots after midnight. Friday: W at winds 10-15 knots. 2) TRAJECTORY: The vessel's drift will be by governed the winds and coastal currents. Examination of the HF radar currents generated by California Ocean the Observing System indicate that there a is small upcoast current of about 0.1knots in that location at this With time. these small currents, the movement will be dominated by winds. the The observations from this afternoon, and the forecast until tonight, about midnight indicate South Southeast winds, which will tend to move the vessel parallel to the coast. It is hard to know how fast it will move without more detail about the condition of the vessel. However, as the orientation of the coastline it shifts, possible is that the vessel could be beached somewhere South of Pt. Sur before midnight. It is hard to know how fast it will move without more detail about the of condition the vessel. After midnight, the wind is expected to shift to be stronger and from the West, will which move the vessel shore, toward probably beaching it within a few hours of the wind shift. We expect the vessel to be beached by early Friday morning, somewhere within ten miles of so of pt. Sur. A more estimate accurate may be able to be produced if we can get data from the locater beacon on board the vessel.
NOAA HAZMAT contacted was to assist in hindcasting a body found June on 27, 2006 floating near Cape May, NJ. For more details, contact please the SSC or C.J. Beegle-Krause.
NOAA HAZMAT was contacted assist to in hindcasting a body found on June 9, 2006 floating off the New coast. Jersey more For details, please contact the SSC or C.J. Beegle-Krause.
Auto Carrier loaded fully adrift without power off Florida Keys [SEP] Date; May 1, 2006 To: NOAA SSC Benggio Brad FROM: NOAA/Hazardous Response Materials Division Modeling and Simulation Studies, Seattle, WA SUBJECT: 98115 M/V Ambassador Crowley FOR INFORMATION, ADDITIONAL PLEASE CONTACT Glen Watabayashi, MODELING AND SIMULATION STUDIES, NOAA, SEATTLE, WA 98115. 526-4911. (206) _______________________________________________________ The reported scenario: A car carrying vessel, the M/V Ambassador has been adrift since 0900 EDT. It is 510' and fully loaded. Reported positions with times: 1615 EDT 24.146' 25deg N by 080deg 03.218' W 1647 EDT 25deg 23.143' N by 080deg 04.240' W 1722 EDT 25deg 23.500' N by 080deg 04.210' W These locations about are 7.5 nm from the outer barrier island Biscayne off Bay. Between 1615 and 1647 the vessel moved to the SSE about 1 nm. Between 1647 and 1722 the vessel moved to the N 0.4 about nm. Onscene conditions are seas 4 - 6 feet and winds from 030deg True at 17 knots A tug is expected to reach vessel the in about 3 hours. If any of this initial information is incorrect, please us let know ASAP as it would affect any trajectory implications. _______________________________________________________ 1) Weather Forecast Winds are expected to be from the NE 15-20 at knots into the evening. 2) Ship Drift Analysis The vessel is located along the western boundary of the Gulf Stream. HF Radar measured currents in the area from Univ. the of Miami site, http://iwave.rsmas.miami.edu/wera/ indicates that currents are moving to the north between 1 1.5 and knots. Car carrying vessels typically sit high in the water have and a significant amount of downwind sail effect. Typical is 'windage' about 5-10% of the wind speed. It appears that the wind, blowing the vessel to the south and the currents the pushing vessel to the are north a almost at standoff. Small variations in the winds, or currents, vessel orientation will result in the vessel moving to either the north or to the south over short of periods time. We do not think that the vessel will move significantly in either direction over next the hours. few Whatever movement is there will be primarily in the north - direction. south Therefore do we expect not the vessel to ground before the tug arrives onscene. [SEP] File Photo of Crowley Ambassador [SEP] M/V CROWLEY AMBASSADOR ADRIFT, BISCAYNE BAY, FL 1730 (EST), Monday, 01, NOTE: May 2006 This is a specific site forecast the from National Weather Service generated specifically for this incident region. Sunset (5/01): 1851 Sunrise (5/02): 0544 Sunset (5/02): 1852 36 Forecast Hour ------------------------------------------------- Winds: night: Monday N-NE 15 -20 knots. Tuesday morning: NE 10 -15 knots. Tuesday afternoon: 5-10 NE knots. Tuesday NE night: 5-10 knots. Waves: Today through Tuesday, seas of 4-6 feet are forecast. Precipitation: Today through Tuesday, no precipitation is forecast. Temperatures: Today: highs mid 80's. Tonight: lows in upper the 60's Tuesday: highs the in mid 80's and lows in the mid to upper 60's. Extended Forecast: Wednesday: ------------------------------------------------- Winds from the NE at 5-10 knots becoming at SE 5-10 in knots the late afternoon. 2-3 Seas feet. No precipitation is forecast Thursday: Winds from the NW at 5-10 knots becoming E at 5-10 knots in the late Seas afternoon. 2-4 feet. No precipitation is forecast. winds Friday: from the at E-SE 10-15 knots. Seas 2-4 feet. No precipitation is forecast. [SEP] Crowley Ambassador Final Report 2 2006 May Situation reported USCG that a tug arrived on scene and took under the vessel tow at approximately 2000 local last night. Case is closed without pollution or incident. grounding
An F-16 jet crashed into the Atlantic Ocean, 35 miles SE of Myrtle Beach Fuel SC. on board was (worst case 5000 JP8. gal) Position 078-24.5W 33-18.2N, [SEP] Initial and Final Report 05 April 2006 Jet Crash Off Myrtle Beach, Situation SC USCG called the NOAA SSC April 5th after just 9PM EDST to report an F16 jet crash miles 35 SE of Myrtle Beach SC. Position33-18.2n; 078-24.5w on fuel board was (wost case 5000 gal) JP8 NOAA provided Adios Oil model Fate discussed and oil fate and trajectory for the spill the with officer on duty. no further action was requested.
On June 24, 2023 a train derailed in Reed Point, MT sending rail carrying cars molten sulfur and molten asphalt the into Yellowstone River. Amounts released into the river are at this unknown time. The incident is under the U.S. jurisdiction EPA's who requested a Fate & Effects report. Photo credit: Yellowstone County Sheriff's Office
On June 24, 2023 a train derailed in Point, Reed sending MT rail cars carrying molten sulfur and molten into asphalt the Yellowstone Amounts released River. into the river are unknown at this time. The incident is under the U.S. EPA's jurisdiction who requested a Fate & Effects report. Photo credit: Yellowstone County Sheriff's Office
On March 16, 2023, the Region EPA 10 contacted the NOAA SSC that a BNSF train derailed near the Swinomish Channel, Anacortes, Washington, There is a potential of approx. 7,000 gallons diesel. of There other are loaded cars still the on tracks.
On March 16, 2023, the EPA Region 10 contacted the NOAA SSC that a BNSF train derailed near the Swinomish Channel, Anacortes, Washington, There is a potential approx. of 7,000 gallons of There diesel. other are loaded still cars on the tracks.
On February 10, 2023, a locomotive on a freight train derailed near Toledo, OR. The locomotive's was tank punctured and released an estimated 2,000 gallons of red dye diesel onto the soil and tracks. Since the derailment, product the has into drained a basin catch and sheen a has been reported on the Yaquina Oregon River. DEQ and US FWS are responding on scene.
On February 10, 2023, a locomotive on a freight train derailed near Toledo, OR. The locomotive's tank punctured was and released an estimated 2,000 gallons of red dye diesel onto soil the and tracks. the Since the derailment, product has drained into a catch basin and a sheen has been reported on Yaquina the River. Oregon DEQ and US are FWS responding on scene.
USCG Sector Maryland NCR notified the NOAA SSC that four empty rail cars had blown off the Susquehanna Bridge River and into the river on Friday, March, 2 2018 during the nor'easter. overseeing USCG salvage efforts and an requested updated weather report.
USCG Sector Maryland NCR notified the NOAA SSC that four empty rail cars had blown off the Susquehanna Bridge River and into the river on Friday, March, 2 during 2018 the nor'easter. USCG overseeing salvage efforts and requested an updated report. weather
On June 3, 2016, the USEPA notified the NOAA SSC that at approximately 12:40pm Union a Pacific unit train carrying crude Bakken oil derailed near the town of Mosier, Oregon, east of Hood River on the Oregon bank of the Columbia River. Initial information was reported that 2 cars are on and fire no oil has reached the water. EPA responders are en route. have been Trustees notified.
On 3, June the 2016, USEPA notified the NOAA SSC that at approximately 12:40pm a Union Pacific unit train carrying Bakken crude petroleum derailed near the town of Mosier, Oregon, east of Hood River the on Oregon bank of the Columbia River. Initial information reported was that 2 cars on are fire and oil no has reached the water. responders EPA are en route. Trustees have been notified.
On May 23rd, 2016, the National Weather Service contacted NOAA's Response Emergency Division (ERD) regarding a train car derailment near South Whitley, Indiana. The car damaged carrying was molten phenol. The sheen rate is unknown, the total amount of phenol in the damaged car tank is unknown.
May On 23rd, 2016, the National Weather Service contacted NOAA's Response Emergency Division (ERD) a regarding train car derailment near South Whitley, Indiana. The damaged car was carrying molten phenol. The spill is rate unknown, the total amount of phenol in the damaged tank car is unknown.
On November 7, 2015, the NOAA SSC received a report from the National Weather Service North Central Forecast River Center that a derailment occurred a with potential sheen into the Upper Mississippi (UMR) River near Alma, WI. It was reported that BNSF 12 train cars derailed, and 6 cars containing denatured alcohol (ethanol) were leaking alcohol into the river. No were injuries reported. No was fire reported. Area was evacuated for safety. NOAA SSC provided fate and effect and response USCG recommendations to Sector Upper Mississippi River.
On November 7, 2015, the NOAA SSC received a report the from National Weather Service North Central River Forecast Center that a derailment occurred with a leak potential the into Upper Mississippi River (UMR) near Alma, WI. It was reported that 12 train BNSF cars derailed, and 6 cars containing denatured alcohol (ethanol) were leaking alcohol into the river. No injuries were reported. No fire was reported. Area was for evacuated safety. NOAA SSC provided fate and effect and response recommendations to USCG Sector Upper River. Mississippi
March On 5, 2015, the USCG requested NOAA SSC assistance for the BNSF Derailment Train along the banks of the Mississippi River of south Galena, IL. The accident occurred in the vicinity of the confluence of the Galena River and the Mississippi near River Mississippi River Marker Mile 565.3. According to statement a from BSNF, the train has 105 cars, 103 of which were carrying crude oil.
On March 5, 2015, the USCG requested NOAA SSC assistance for the BNSF Train Derailment along banks of the the Mississippi River south of Galena, IL. The accident occurred in vicinity the of the confluence of the River Galena and the Mississippi River near Mississippi Mile River Marker 565.3. According to a statement from the BSNF, train has 105 cars, 103 of which were carrying crude oil.
On February 16, 2015, a CSX train derailed near Kanawha the River in West Virginia. The train was hauling Bakken crude oil. An unknown amount of crude petroleum was into released Armstrong Creek which feeds into Kanawha the River. the Initially, derailed train caused cars a huge but the fire, fire has been extinguished at this time. The towns of Village Adena and Bottom Boomer have both been evacuated (evacuation of 1 mile radius from derailment). The area has heavy snow and extremely cold temperatures. USCG Sector Ohio Valley has requested on-scene NOAA SSC support.
February On 16, 2015, a CSX derailed train near the River Kanawha in West Virginia. The train was hauling Bakken crude oil. An unknown amount of crude oil was released into Armstrong which Creek feeds into the Kanawha River. the Initially, derailed train caused cars a huge fire, but the fire has been extinguished at this time. The towns of Adena Village and Boomer Bottom have both been evacuated (evacuation of 1 mile radius derailment). from The area has heavy snow and extremely cold temperatures. USCG Sector Ohio Valley has requested on-scene NOAA SSC support.
On February 6, 2015, the EPA requested denatured ethanol fate and trajectory associated with the CPR Train Derailment. The CPR Train Derailment occurred on 4, February 2015, along the of banks the River Mississippi approximately miles 10 north of Dubuque, Iowa, near the city of Balltown.
On February 6, 2015, the EPA requested denatured ethanol fate trajectory and associated with the CPR Train Derailment. The CPR Train Derailment occurred on February 4, 2015, along the banks of River the Mississippi approximately miles 10 north of Dubuque, Iowa, near the city of Balltown.
On afternoon the of 30 April 2014, an estimated 18 cars of a train, CSX carrying Bakken crude oil, derailed in the City of Lynchburg, which caused an intense The fire. fire have been extinguished. Three of the cars fell into the James River and are laying on bank the of the There river. is an estimated 10,000 to 23,000 gallons of oil in the river, depending on how much oil was consumed in the fire.
On the afternoon of 30 2014, April an estimated 18 cars of a CSX train, carrying Bakken crude oil, derailed in the City of Lynchburg, which caused an intense fire. The have fire extinguished. been the Three of cars fell into the James River and are laying on the bank of the river. There is an estimated 10,000 to 23,000 gallons of oil in depending the river, on how much oil was consumed in the fire.
Early on Friday November 8, 2013, 90 a unit car train carrying crude petroleum enroute from Amory, Mississippi to Walnut Hill, Florida derailed near Aliceville, Twenty Al. six (26) tanker cars filled with crude oil derailed into a wetland slough at the head waters of on a tributary Lubbub of Creek. Lubbub Creek discharges into the Tombigbee River. Shortly after the derailment rail the began cars oil discharging and then caught fire.
Early on Friday November 8, a 2013, 90 car unit train carrying crude fuel enroute from Amory, Mississippi to Walnut Hill, Florida derailed near Aliceville, six Al. Twenty (26) tanker cars filled with crude oil derailed into wetland a at slough the head waters of on a tributary of Lubbub Creek. Lubbub Creek discharges the into Tombigbee River. Shortly after the derailment rail the cars began discharging oil and then caught fire.
freight A train car carrying molten sulfur derailed and sprung a leak on 7 Saturday, March 2009. The notified USCG the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of both the damaged rail leaking car molten sulfur and several empty reported hazmat rail cars that contained only residuals of anhydrous ammonia and styrene monomer. The hot sulfur molten created an air threat an forcing evacuation. [SEP] A freight train car carrying molten derailed sulfur and sprung a leak Saturday, on 7 March 2009. The USCG the notified NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of both the damaged rail car leaking molten sulfur and reported several empty hazmat rail cars that contained only residuals of anhydrous ammonia and styrene monomer. hot The sulfur molten created an air threat forcing an evacuation. The incident where occurred the bridge crosses Bayou Plaquemine in the city of LA Plaquemine, (30?? 17.59???€? 091?? N Lat. 14.32???€? W Long.). The threat was mostly from the rotten egg smell of hydrogen sulfide that a has very low odor threshold. Nobody was hurt. The five cars that derailed were near the rear of a 67-car that train was going 16 mph at the time of the accident. NOAA provided only verbal consultation to the USCG responding to the incident in conjunction with state authorities. The sulfur itself once cooled is not considered a major environmental concern. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator follow will up with the USCG on this incident to if there assess are any residual issues would be of that concern. If there are no follow issues up that involve the USCG and NOAA, this report will as serve the Initial and Final Hotline report. This could have been much worse.
A freight train car carrying molten sulfur derailed and sprung a leak on Saturday, 7 2009. The March USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of the both damaged rail car leaking molten sulfur and several reported empty hazmat cars rail that contained only residuals of anhydrous ammonia and styrene monomer. The hot molten sulfur created an air threat forcing an [SEP] evacuation. A freight train car carrying molten sulfur derailed and sprung leak a on Saturday, March 7 2009. The USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator of both the rail damaged car leaking molten sulfur and several reported empty hazmat rail cars that contained only residuals of ammonia anhydrous and styrene monomer. molten The hot sulfur created an air threat forcing an evacuation. The incident where occurred the bridge crosses Plaquemine Bayou in the city of Plaquemine, LA 17.59???€? (30?? N Lat. 091?? 14.32???€? W Long.). The threat mostly was from the rotten egg smell of hydrogen sulfide that has a very low odor threshold. Nobody was hurt. The five cars derailed were that rear near the of a 67-car train that was going 16 mph the at time of the accident. NOAA provided only verbal consultation to the responding USCG to the incident in conjunction with state authorities. The sulfur itself once cooled is not considered a major environmental concern. The NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator will follow up the with USCG on this incident to assess if there are any residual issues that would of be concern. there If are no follow up issues that involve the USCG and NOAA, this report will as serve the and Initial Final report. Hotline This could have been much worse.
A train derailed in Saginaw Michigan at 2040 approximately December 27, no hazardous material has been released into the environment, but there is potential of 125T of Acrylonitrile. The location of the derailed is train approximately 600' from the River. Saginaw [SEP] Train Hazardous Carrying Materials Derails Derailment Hazmat Brings Team To Saginaw Scene Train [NEWSVINE: Carrying Hazardous Materials Derails] Firefighters said four of the five cars that derailed at Wadsworth Avenue near Veterans Memorial Parkway appear to be harmless. Officials said the train was bound for Dow's Michigan manufacturing Operations site. Hazardous materials experts from Dow arrived to offer help and police quickly secured and barricaded area. Northbound the Highway 675 at Interstate 75 and southbound Highway 675 at Avenue Davenport is now open.
A derailed train in Saginaw Michigan at approximately 2040 December 27, hazardous no material has been released into the environment, but there is of potential 125T of Acrylonitrile. The location of the derailed train is approximately 600' from the Saginaw River. [SEP] Carrying Train Hazardous Materials Derailment Derails Team Brings Hazmat To Saginaw Scene [NEWSVINE: Train Carrying Hazardous Materials Derails] Firefighters said four five of the cars that derailed at Wadsworth Avenue near Veterans Memorial Parkway to appear be harmless. Officials said the train was bound for Dow's Michigan Operations manufacturing site. Hazardous materials experts from Dow to arrived offer help and police quickly secured and barricaded area. the Northbound Highway 675 at Interstate 75 and southbound Highway 675 at Davenport Avenue is now open.
On January 5th, 2023, Florida the Keys National Marine the Sanctuary contacted NOAA Emergency Response Division to request modeling support for a large abandoned gill net found near a coral reef restoration site. Gill nets are allowed not in Florida waters. staff Sanctuary requested a modeling hind-cast to help determine where the net might have originated.
January On 5th, 2023, the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary contacted the NOAA Emergency Response Division to request modeling support for a large abandoned gill net found near a coral reef site. restoration Gill nets are not allowed in waters. Florida Sanctuary staff requested a modeling hind-cast to determine help where the net have might originated.
On July 25, 2020, the 984-foot bulk carrier WAKASHIO M/V ran aground on a coral reef off the of coast Pointe-D’Esny, The Mauritius. situation was initially reported as stable but in the past few days, the vessel has begun fuel leaking oil. The vessel is reported to have approximately 1.1 million gallons fuel of and lube oils on board, but no was not laden with On cargo. August 8, 2020, the US National Response Team and NOAA notified were via the US. Department of State, to address a formal request for assistance from the Mauritius This Government. hotline was opened to capture information regarding the incident. from [SEP] https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-mauritius-activation-666- [SEP] NOAA Satellite of Assessment the Oil Spill in Mauritius Version 1 Published: 17 Aug Analysis: Aug 5 16 Aug 2020
July On 25, 2020, the bulk carrier 984-foot M/V WAKASHIO ran aground on a coral reef off the coast of Pointe-D’Esny, Mauritius. situation The was reported initially as stable but in the past few days, the vessel has begun leaking fuel oil. The vessel to is reported have 1.1 approximately million gallons of and fuel lube oils on board, but no not was laden with cargo. On August 8, 2020, the US National Response Team and NOAA were notified via the US. Department of State, to address a formal request for assistance from the Mauritius Government. This hotline was opened to capture information regarding the incident. from [SEP] https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-mauritius-activation-666- [SEP] NOAA Satellite Assessment of the Oil Spill in Mauritius Version 1 Published: 17 Aug Analysis: 5 Aug 16 Aug 2020
U.S. Navy SUPSALV has contacted the NOAA SSC for the Pacific Islands to request trajectory support in the event an of oil release planned during operations on the sunken Ex-USS in EUGEN PRINZ Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. The 700-foot heavy German cruiser sank in December but 1946 still contains fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Support is Team together putting information on the likely oil trajectory in the event of a release, as well as information on chemistry and expected persistence Navy of Special Fuel Oil . [SEP] US Navy SupSalv article following completion of salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. Navy SUPSALV has contacted the NOAA SSC for the Pacific Islands to request support trajectory in the event of an oil release planned during operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. The 700-foot German heavy cruiser sank in December 1946 but still fuel contains oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Support Team is putting together information on the likely oil trajectory in the event of a release, as well as on information chemistry expected and persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil . [SEP] Navy US SupSalv following article of completion salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
On July 5, 2015, the USCG San notified Juan the SSC that a 22 foot recreational boat beached on a reef in St. Thomas, USVI. The vessel reportedly had 12 gallons of gasoline aboard there and have may been impact to the coral associated the with grounding.
July On 5, 2015, the USCG San Juan notified the SSC that a 22 foot vessel recreational beached on a reef in Thomas, St. USVI. vessel The reportedly had 12 gallons of gasoline aboard and there may have been impact to the coral associated with the grounding.
On May 14, 2015, the M/V a Aubi, powered catamaran, ran aground in the vicinity of Punta Aercibo, Tuna, Puerto Rico. aluminum The vessel is reported to contain 800 gallons of diesel fuel. A towing company has been for hired salvage operations. The vessel is hard aground and there are in coral the area. Coral damage has been reported due to grounding. the
On May 14, 2015, the M/V Aubi, a powered catamaran, ran aground in the vicinity Punta of Tuna, Aercibo, Puerto Rico. The aluminum vessel is reported to contain 800 gallons of diesel fuel. A towing has company been hired salvage for operations. The vessel is hard aground and there are coral in the area. Coral has damage been reported due to the grounding.
On September 8, 2014, the USCG Sector Guam notified the NOAA SSC for Oceania a 500 that foot container ship, the M/V Paul Russ, ran aground in Tanapag Harbor in Saipan. The vessel has approximately 320,000 gallons of IFO on 380 board but there has no been release at this time. The vessel is to reported be hard aground stable. but
On 8, September the 2014, USCG Sector Guam notified the NOAA SSC for Oceania that a foot 500 container ship, the Paul M/V Russ, ran aground in Tanapag Harbor in Saipan. The vessel has approximately 320,000 gallons of IFO 380 on board but there has been no release this at time. vessel The is reported to be hard aground but stable.
About midnight January on 31, 2014, the M/V Commander, a foot 221 RO/RO (roll-on, roll-off) ship ran aground on a reef outside channel the in Gallows Bay near Christiansted, St Croix, USVI. The vessel has gallons 5000 of diesel fuel onboard. No leak has been reported. USCG is working with salvers on a plan to refloat the vessel. SSC NOAA is helping consultation to coordinate issues with DOI, USFWS, SHPO, and NMFS. NOAA is also providing initial oil trajectory, fate, and weather information.
About midnight on January 31, 2014, the Commander, M/V a 221 foot RO/RO (roll-on, roll-off) ship ran aground on a reef outside the channel in Gallows Bay near Christiansted, St USVI. Croix, The vessel has 5000 gallons of fuel diesel onboard. No spill has been reported. USCG working is salvers with on a plan to refloat the vessel. NOAA SSC is helping to coordinate consultation issues with DOI, USFWS, SHPO, and NMFS. NOAA is also providing initial trajectory, fate, petroleum and weather information.
On December 2013, 19, the USCG 14 District contacted the NOAA for SSC Oceania to request a trajectory analysis for potential release of oil from a refrigerated fish carrier, the DA PING 7, which beached the prior week on a fringing reef on the north side of Pohnpei, Federated Micronesia States of (FSM). USCG D14 has been monitoring the status of the State/FSM Pohnpei containment government to the Chinese-owned, Kiribati-flagged vessel, although to date there has been no request for USCG assistance. The tanker is reportedly carrying 75 metric tonnes of IFO 180, 75 metric tonnes of Gas Marine and Oil, 8 metric tonnes of lube oil.
December On 19, 2013, the USCG District 14 contacted the NOAA for SSC Oceania request to a trajectory analysis for release of potential oil from a refrigerated fish carrier, the PING DA 7, which beached the prior week on a fringing reef on the north side of Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). D14 USCG has been the monitoring status of the Pohnpei State/FSM government response to the Chinese-owned, Kiribati-flagged vessel, although to date there has been no request for USCG assistance. The vessel is reportedly carrying 75 metric tonnes of 180, IFO 75 metric of tonnes Gas Marine Oil, and 8 metric tonnes of lube oil.
On September 13, 2013, USCG District 14 notified the SSC for the Pacific Islands that two 60-foot fishing vessels had beached on Tinian Island. Both vessels grounded along the south shore of Kammer Reef, south just of Tinian’s Harbor. USCG Sector Guam, CNMI Department of Public and Safety, CNMI DEQ responding. are One vessel has been already safely refloated. The vessel remaining aground, IL the SIN HO, is to reported have an unspecified quantity fuel of oily and bilge water onboard. The responsible party taken has responsibility and is putting together a fuel removal and salvage plan for submission to USCG Sector Guam for review and approval. NOAA NMFS coral and restoration experts are engaged with the response and providing to guidance minimize breach to coral during salvage operations.
On September 13, 2013, USCG District 14 notified the SSC for the Pacific Islands that two fishing 60-foot vessels had ran aground on Tinian Island. Both vessels grounded along the south shore of Kammer Reef, just south Harbor. of Tinian’s USCG Sector Guam, CNMI Department of Public Safety, and CNMI DEQ are responding. vessel One has already been safely refloated. The vessel remaining aground, the IL SIN HO, is to reported have an unspecified quantity of fuel and oily bilge water onboard. The responsible party has taken responsibility and is putting together a fuel removal and salvage plan submission for to USCG Sector Guam for review and approval. NOAA NMFS coral and restoration experts are engaged with the remediation and providing guidance to minimize damage coral during to salvage operations.
USCG Sector Guam the notified NOAA SSC on July 29 that an 18-foot US National Park Service boat work had capsized and was aground on reef at Asa Beach in Adelup, The Guam. was vessel carrying 25 gallons of fuel at the time but no discharge was observed. At the of time notification, plans were made being to remove the vessel. This was a NOAA notification. ERD No support was requested.
USCG Sector Guam notified the NOAA on SSC July 29 that an 18-foot US National Park Service work boat had capsized and was aground on reef at Asa Beach in Adelup, Guam. The vessel was carrying gallons 25 of fuel at the time but no discharge observed. At was the time of notification, plans were being made to remove the This vessel. a NOAA was notification. No ERD support was requested.
On June 21, 2012, NOAA was notified of the grounding of the Jireh M/V on the west shore of Mona Puerto Island, Rico. The 200-foot ship was reported aground this morning at 0700 local time. The vessel is aground hard on coral, rock and sand Position bottom. is reported as Lat/Lon: 18 04.07N, 067 55.5W. The USCG has requested SSC support in the response/salvage/removal effort and NRDA teams are preparing to address coral injury. [SEP] [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/1482251/UPDATE-Coast-Guard-state-and-local-agencies-monitor-response-removal-operations-underway-in-Mona-Island-Puerto-Rico USCG PRESS RELEASE PLAN [SEP] Photo of the Jireh aground. Photo Credit: USCG [SEP] Command Unified efforts continues for freighter grounding in Mona Island, Puerto Rico Posted: 23 Jun 2012 06:09 PM PDT SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico ???€? The Coast Guard and other federal, state and industry responders continue efforts are and evaluating potential salvage options for 185-foot the freighter cargo that ran just aground off Uvero Beach in Mona Island, Puerto Rico Thursday. ???€?Our primary concern right now is the of recovery the fuel and crude onboard the freighter and minimizing environmental said impact,???€? Cmdr. David Berliner, Coast Guard Incident Commander to the response. As a preventive cleanup measure, deployed approximately 800-feet crews of containment boom around cargo the freighter in order to minimize environmental impact. The Guard Coast Cutter Reef Shark is maintaining a 500-yard safety zone around vessel. the Atlantis Divers completed thorough a underwater hull assessment and found no significant compromise to the ship???€?s hull or signs of pollution in the Saturday. water ???€?Puerto Rico Environmental Quality Board has been working jointly with state agencies with the and Coast Guard to protect environment and the any prevent significant impact to natural resources,???€? said Eng. Amarilys Rosario, State Commander Incident the response. to Oil spill removal are contractors staging equipment to remove the more than 2,000 gallons of fuel diesel aboard the vessel as early as Sunday. An Incident Command Post and Unified Command comprised of federal, and state industry agencies and organizations has been established at Coast Guard Base San Juan to manage response and salvage efforts of the coastal freighter Jireh. The Incident Command Post the includes Coast Guard, Puerto Rico Quality Environmental Board, U.S. Fish and Wildlife, the National & Atmospheric Oceanic Administration, Puerto Department of and Natural Environmental Resources, and Clean Harbors as the contracted Oil Response Spill Organization. Coast The Guard continues investigating the cause the of grounding. Copyright ?? 2007-2011 Guard Coast News This feed is for personal, non-commercial use only. http://coastguardnews.com/unified-command-continues-efforts-for-freighter-grounding-in-mona-island-puerto-rico/2012/06/23/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+CoastGuardNews+%28Coast+Guard+News%29 [SEP] http://d7.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/1518403/Response-crews-begin-cutting-up-grounded-vessel-for-removal-from-Mona-Island
On June 21, 2012, NOAA was notified of grounding the of the M/V Jireh on the shore west of Mona Puerto Island, The Rico. 200-foot vessel reported was aground this morning at 0700 local time. The vessel is hard aground on coral, rock and sand bottom. is Position reported as Lat/Lon: 18 04.07N, 067 55.5W. The USCG has requested SSC support in the response/salvage/removal effort and NRDA teams are to preparing address coral injury. [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/1482251/UPDATE-Coast-Guard-state-and-local-agencies-monitor-response-removal-operations-underway-in-Mona-Island-Puerto-Rico [SEP] USCG PRESS [SEP] RELEASE PLAN Photo of the Jireh aground. Photo Credit: USCG [SEP] Unified Command continues efforts for freighter grounding in Mona Island, Puerto Rico Posted: Jun 23 2012 06:09 PM SAN PDT JUAN, Puerto Rico ???€? The Coast Guard and other state federal, and industry responders continue efforts and are evaluating potential options salvage for the cargo 185-foot freighter that ran aground just off Uvero Beach in Mona Island, Puerto Rico Thursday. ???€?Our primary concern right now is the recovery of the and fuel crude onboard the freighter and minimizing environmental impact,???€? said David Berliner, Cmdr. Coast Guard Commander Incident to the response. As a preventive response measure, crews deployed approximately 800-feet of containment around boom the cargo freighter in order to minimize environmental impact. The Guard Coast Cutter Reef Shark is maintaining 500-yard a safety zone around the vessel. Atlantis Divers completed a underwater thorough hull and assessment found no significant to damage the ship???€?s hull or signs of pollution in the Saturday. water ???€?Puerto Rico Environmental Board Quality has been jointly working with state agencies and with the Guard Coast to protect the environment and prevent any significant impact to natural resources,???€? said Eng. Amarilys Rosario, State Incident Commander to the response. Oil spill removal contractors are staging equipment to remove the more than 2,000 gallons of diesel fuel the aboard vessel as early as Sunday. An Command Incident Post and Unified Command comprised of federal, state and agencies industry and organizations has been established at Coast Guard Base San Juan to manage response and salvage efforts of coastal the freighter Jireh. The Incident Command Post includes the Coast Guard, Puerto Environmental Rico Quality Board, U.S. Fish and Wildlife, the National Atmospheric & Oceanic Administration, Puerto Department of Natural and Environmental Resources, and Clean Harbors as the contracted Oil Spill Response Organization. The Coast Guard continues investigating the cause of the grounding. Copyright ?? 2007-2011 Coast Guard News This feed is for personal, non-commercial use http://coastguardnews.com/unified-command-continues-efforts-for-freighter-grounding-in-mona-island-puerto-rico/2012/06/23/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+CoastGuardNews+%28Coast+Guard+News%29 only. [SEP] http://d7.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/1518403/Response-crews-begin-cutting-up-grounded-vessel-for-removal-from-Mona-Island
This morning at 0605 EST DARRP was notified by USCG Sector Juan San that the 920' LNG Carrier Matthew grounded on a reef in while bound to Guayanilla, PR at approximately 0500EST. The vessel's starboard bow was as reported aground. While CG was establishing an and IC activated salvage teams the the vessel was able to free herself by transferring ballast and bunker fuel aft. Three tugs were also on hand to assist. CG reported the was vessel free We 0812EST. have a NOAA contractor to enroute catch up with CG the investigators as well as to do an initial reef survey. [SEP] Map showing the location of the in Matthew relation to the island of Puerto Rico. Photo [SEP] - Damaged Coral [SEP] Michael Nemeth (under contract to NOAA Sea through Ventures) is currently with the USCG aboard vessel the gathering information on the incident and subsequent salvage. Sea Ventures personnel have also located grounding the site and in brief a update back relayed that "significant coral damage had occurred" and that the site was "three times larger then the Port Stewart". Port The Stewart is are most recently significant tanker grounding in Puerto Rico and likely impacted 1500 to sq. meters 2000 of reef. More information to follow this evening. [SEP] 920' LNG Carrier "Matthew" - Guayanilla, PR This morning at EST 0605 NOAA DARRP (T.Moore) was notified by USCG Sector San Juan that 920' the Liquid Gas Natural Carrier Matthew had grounded while into inbound the Eco Electrica Facility Guayanilla, in PR. The vessel was reported to have grounded in position 17 57.7N, 066 with 45.4W heading a of It 030. was reported initially that the vessel in aground was its starboard bow. USCG inquired also if local NOAA staff might be available to respond on-scene in order to help prevent additional impacts coral during extraction. USCG also said they establishing were a formal response, standing up USCG salvage teams, and were requesting the vessel draw lightening up plans. We advised USCG that we knew reef of in the area (this is in the same general vicinity of the T/V Margara grounding) and advised that it would be prudent to make sure they had soundings on deeper water prior to vessel removal NOAA staff DARRP in PR are off the island, however we stood up the NOAA support Response/Restoration contract and had Dr. Michael Nemeth en-route at 0640EST. Dr. Nemeth original plans were to meet up with the staff DNER for transport to the vessel. called back USCG at 0812EST and informed me the vessel was off the reef and enroute to the dock. USCG requested that Dr. Nemeth meet up with the CG investigator Eco at Electrica and he is en-route to that location. We also currently have a dive team from our restoration support contractor to en-route the site for a preliminary investigation. It should be noted that the new NOAA ERMA (Environmental System Response Management Application) very was in useful getting overall situation awareness. We were able to locations view the of Matthew and the assist tugs using the near-real-time AIS Ship Tracker. [SEP] Photo - Damage Coral [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center [SEP] Attached is a plot the of location of the Matthew and the assist at Tugs 0807 via EST the AIS Ship Tracker on ERMA. Photo [SEP] - Crushed Coral [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Center Restoration [SEP] Photo - Flattened Reef [SEP] Photos by Griffin, Sean NOAA Center Restoration [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center
This morning at 0605 EST DARRP was notified by USCG Sector San Juan that the 920' Carrier LNG Matthew beached on a reef while to bound in Guayanilla, PR at approximately 0500EST. The vessel's starboard bow was as aground. reported While CG was establishing an IC and activated salvage teams the the ship was able to free by herself transferring and ballast bunker fuel aft. Three tugs were also hand on to assist. CG reported the vessel was free 0812EST. have We a NOAA contractor to enroute catch up with the investigators CG as well as to do an initial reef survey. [SEP] Map showing the location of the Matthew in relation to the island of Puerto Rico. [SEP] Photo - Damaged [SEP] Coral Michael Nemeth (under contract to NOAA through Sea Ventures) currently with is the USCG aboard the vessel gathering information on the incident and salvage. subsequent Sea Ventures personnel have located also the grounding site in and a brief update back relayed that "significant coral damage had occurred" and that the site was "three times larger then the Port Stewart". The Port Stewart is are most recently significant tanker grounding in Puerto Rico and likely impacted 1500 to 2000 sq. meters of reef. More information to follow this evening. [SEP] 920' Carrier LNG "Matthew" - Guayanilla, PR This at morning 0605 EST NOAA DARRP (T.Moore) was notified USCG by Sector San Juan that the Liquid 920' Gas Natural Carrier Matthew had grounded while inbound into the Eco Electrica Facility in Guayanilla, PR. The vessel was to reported have grounded in 17 position 57.7N, 066 45.4W with a heading of 030. It was initially reported that the vessel was aground in bow. its starboard USCG also if inquired local NOAA staff might be available to respond on-scene in order to help prevent additional coral during impacts extraction. USCG also said they were establishing a formal response, standing up USCG salvage teams, and were requesting vessel the draw up lightening plans. We advised USCG that we knew reef of in area the (this is in the same general vicinity of the T/V Margara grounding) and advised that it would be prudent make to sure they had soundings on deeper water prior to vessel removal DARRP NOAA staff PR in are off the island, stood however we up the NOAA Response/Restoration support contract had and Dr. Nemeth Michael en-route at 0640EST. Dr. Nemeth original plans were to meet up with the DNER staff for transport to the USCG vessel. called back at 0812EST and me informed the vessel off was the reef and enroute to the dock. USCG requested that Dr. meet Nemeth up the with CG investigator at Eco Electrica and he is en-route to that location. also We currently have dive a team from our restoration support contractor en-route to the site for a preliminary investigation. It should noted be that the new NOAA ERMA System (Environmental Response Management Application) was very useful in getting overall situation awareness. We were to able view locations of the Matthew and the tugs assist using the near-real-time AIS Ship Tracker. [SEP] Photo - Damage Coral Photos [SEP] by Sean Griffin, Restoration NOAA Center [SEP] Attached is a plot of the of location the Matthew and the assist Tugs at EST 0807 via the AIS Ship Tracker on ERMA. [SEP] Photo - Crushed Coral [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center [SEP] Photo - Flattened Reef [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center [SEP] Photos by Sean Griffin, NOAA Restoration Center
On 09DEC2009 at 1713 AST DARRP NOAA notified was by USCG the of grounding of the S/V RULING ANGEL via the email notification system. The a vessel, 80' Custom Sailboat became disorientated as a squall hit and it subsequently grounding on Round Reef just to the north of Christiansted Harbor in St. Croix, The USVI. vessel has 800 gallon of Diesel in its tanks, which are secure. After 6 hours of salvage efforts by local tow boats the vessel was subsequently freed and towed to Marina. Christiansted USCG is hull conducting a survey on 10DEC2009 USVI and DPNR is planning to survey reef damage on 11DEC2009. [SEP] via Google Earth... [SEP] via Google Earth [SEP] via Google Earth [SEP] NOAA Nautical Chart Christiansted of Harbor from ERMA
On 09DEC2009 at 1713 AST NOAA DARRP was notified USCG by of the grounding of the S/V RULING ANGEL via the email notification The system. vessel, a 80' Custom Sailboat became disorientated as a squall hit it and subsequently on grounding Round Reef just the to north of Christiansted Harbor in St. Croix, The USVI. ship has gallon 800 of in Diesel tanks, its which are secure. After 6 hours of salvage efforts by local tow boats the vessel was subsequently freed and towed to Christiansted USCG Marina. is conducting a hull survey on 10DEC2009 and USVI DPNR is planning to survey reef damage on 11DEC2009. [SEP] Google via Earth... [SEP] via Google Earth [SEP] via Google Earth [SEP] NOAA Chart Nautical of Christiansted Harbor from ERMA
On January 5th, 2023, the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary the contacted NOAA Emergency Response Division to request modeling support for large a abandoned gill found net a near coral reef restoration site. Gill nets are not allowed in Florida waters. Sanctuary staff requested a modeling hind-cast help to determine where the net might have originated.
On January 5th, 2023, the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary contacted the NOAA Emergency Response Division to request modeling support for a large abandoned gill net found a near coral reef restoration site. Gill nets are not allowed in Sanctuary Florida waters. staff requested a modeling hind-cast help to determine the where net might have originated.
On January 5th, 2023, the Florida National Keys Marine Sanctuary contacted the NOAA Emergency Response Division to request modeling support for a large abandoned gill net found near a coral reef restoration Gill site. nets are not allowed in Florida waters. staff Sanctuary requested a modeling hind-cast to help determine where the net might have originated.
On 4-NOV-2021, the NOAA SSC notified was by the USCG MSU Portland that the and abandoned derelict vessel (ADV) Alert in sank the Columbia River near Portland, Oregon. The Tugboat Sakarissa, also an ADV, was moored to the Alert. Previous efforts in 2020 removed hazardous materials from both ships. There is a slight observable sheen in the water oily from residue on the Alert and concern that the Sakarissa will break free and float downriver. The CG has requested phone support, SSC NOAA to assist with consultations and technical assistance as needed.
On 4-NOV-2021, the NOAA SSC was notified the by USCG Portland that MSU the abandoned and derelict vessel Alert (ADV) sank in the Columbia River near Portland, The Oregon. Sakarissa, Tugboat an also ADV, was moored to the Alert. Previous efforts in 2020 removed hazardous materials from both ships. is There a slight observable sheen in the water from oily residue on the Alert and concern that Sakarissa the will break free and float downriver. The CG has requested phone support, NOAA SSC to assist with consultations and technical assistance as needed.
On 4-NOV-2021, the NOAA SSC was notified by the USCG MSU Portland that the abandoned and boat derelict Alert (ADV) sank in the River Columbia near Portland, Oregon. The Tugboat Sakarissa, also an ADV, was moored to the Previous Alert. efforts in removed 2020 hazardous materials from both ships. There is a slight observable sheen in the water from oily residue on the Alert and concern that the Sakarissa will break free and float downriver. The CG has requested phone support, SSC NOAA assist to with consultations and technical assistance as needed.
On the morning of February 1, 2020, a concerned citizen reported a sunken barge deck to the NOAA Marine Debris (MDD). Division The barge sank on 6 December and is completely under water, except for two poles steel extending 6 feet from the deck of the barge. It is reported to in be shallow water about 150 feet the off shoreline. SSC notified USCG about the barge.
On the morning February of 1, a 2020, concerned citizen reported a sunken barge deck to the NOAA Marine Debris Division (MDD). The barge sank on December 6 and is completely water, under except for two steel poles extending 6 from feet the deck of the It barge. is reported to be in shallow water about 150 feet off the shoreline. SSC notified USCG about the barge.
On the morning of February 1, a 2020, concerned citizen a reported sunken deck barge to NOAA the Marine Debris Division The (MDD). barge sank on December 6 and completely is under water, except for two steel poles 6 extending feet from the deck of the barge. It is reported to be in shallow water about 150 feet off the shoreline. SSC notified USCG about the barge.
On September 8, 2019, the USCG contacted the NOAA SSC to a report RORO vessel, the Golden Ray had capsized off Brunswick, Georgia. The vessel was on fire. USCG was conducting rescue operations. NOAA will provide an initial trajectory analysis and Resources at Risk report. The NWS is providing spot forecasts for the incident. [SEP] from DVIDS Coast Guard and crews port partners respond to a disabled vessel with cargo a fire on board 8, September 2019, in St. Simons Sound, Georgia. At approximately 2 a.m., Coast Guard Sector Charleston watch standers were notified of the M/V GOLDEN RAY, a 656???€? vehicle carrier, heavily listing in the St. Simons Sound with a of total 24 people on board; including 23 crew members and 1 pilot. (U.S. Coast Guard photo) [SEP] Coast Guard and salvage crews extracted the remaining four Golden Ray crew members Sept. 9, 2019, in St. near Sound Simons Georgia. The Brunswick, crew members were transported by a Coast Guard Station Brunswick 45-foot Response Boat-Medium boat to crew Glenn County EMS for further medical evaluation. (U.S. Coast Guard by photo Coast Guard Station Brunswick) [SEP] From: https://ssiresponse.com/ A knuckle boom excavator picks up 1-to-3-inch rock-aggregate from a container barge in St. Simons Sound, Oct. Georgia, 2019. 29, The excavator guided by sonar and GPS, strategically places the rock next to the hull of the M/V Golden Ray to slow erosion. Unit Manager Reid of Jackson the Georgia Protection Environmental Division, walks past a mound of gravel, Brunswick, Georgia, Oct. 2019. 25, The 1-to-3 inch rock-mixture was staged for deployment and later placed next to hull the of the M/V Golden Ray in order to slow down erosion around the vessel. Unified Command mitigation crews begin operations to reduce further erosion of the seafloor around the M/V Golden Ray in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Oct. 29, 2019. Sonar and technology GPS guide a boom knuckle excavator as it places 1-to-3-inch rock-aggregate next to the hull of the vessel to slow erosion. [SEP] A diver descends down a ladder to inspect rock-aggregate placed around the M/V Golden Ray to prevent stabilize erosion and the wreck in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Nov. 9, 2019. [SEP] Removal of rudder and propeller from the Ray Golden is complete. BRUNSWICK, ???€? Ga. The St. Simons Sound Response Incident Unified Command has successfully completed the removal of the rudder propeller and from the Golden Ray today. Crews worked over the past week to complete the operation which was hampered by adverse weather conditions at times. The removal of approximately 130 tons weight of will help reduce stresses to the hull of the wreck. of Portions the ship that were removed are being donated to the State of Georgia for use as artificial reefs in areas designated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. work Crews to remove propeller the from the M/V Golden Ray, St. Sound, Simons Dec. 20, 2019. Crews transfer the propeller from the M/V Golden Ray to the work barges for safe removal, St. Simons Sound, Dec. 20, 2019. Crews remove the rudder from the M/V Ray Golden and transfer to the it barges work for safe removal, St. Sound, Simons Dec. 20, This 2019. entry was posted in Updates, Incident News Releases, Imagery Response on December 20, 2019 12:15 PM. [SEP] Unified Command Continues St. Simons Sound Incident Response: Update 25 Date: 10.12.19 Contact: Joint Information Center (912) 944-7122 Unified Command has completed lightering the of the fuel oil forward tanks onboard the M/V Golden Ray. More than 225,000 gallons of fuel have removed been to date. Lightering of the remaining fuel and lubricant tanks continues. Maritime engaged experts in response the have determined that it is possible not to safely right and refloat the in vessel a fully intact condition. Consequently, Unified Command is developing plans to remove of all the M/V Ray???€?s Golden hull, components, and cargo by disassembling the vessel in place. This remains complex a situation but additional information about the removal plan and the expected timeline will be shared the with public as and when available. mitigation Pollution and response efforts will continue throughout the duration the of removal operation. Unified Command???€?s priorities are ensuring safety the of responders and the public, protecting the environment, and completing a full of removal the vessel. All parties involved the in response are fully to committed the successful completion of these operations. Specialists from the Unified Command are conducting water monitoring at 22 under sites a long term to plan ensure the safety of the public. The Georgia Department of Health has issued a swimming and fishing advisory, members and of the public are encouraged to visit the Georgia Department Public of Health website or call 863-0325 (844) for further public health information and advisories. Members of the public should not oil touch or attempt to rescue oiled birds or wildlife. They instead should report any sightings of oil to (800) 424-8802 and report any oiled wildlife (800) to 261-0980. claims A number has been established for those affected by the incident 850-8486. (888) [SEP] A Coast Guard Air Station Savannah MH-65 Dolphin helicopter lands on the side of the Ray, Golden 656-foot a vehicle to carrier, drop off supplies for Coast Guard crews and port partners who attempt to locate and rescue remaining the four crewmembers aboard the Golden Ray, Sept. 9, 2019, in St. Simons Sound, near Brunswick, Georgia. A Coast Guard Air Station Savannah Dolphin MH-65 helicopter aircrew, Station Brunswick boat crews and other partners port rescued 20 people the morning of after Sept. 8, it was reported the vessel was disabled and listing. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Ryan Class Dickinson) [SEP] Guard Coast and rescue crews, along with port partners, attempt to locate and rescue the remaining four crewmembers aboard 656-foot the vehicle carrier Golden Ray, Sept. 9, in 2019, St. Sound, Simons Brunswick, near Georgia. A Coast Guard Air Savannah Station MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrew, Station Brunswick boat crews and other port partners rescued 20 people the morning of Sept. 8, after it was reported the vessel was disabled and listing. (U.S. Coast Guard by photo Petty Officer 3rd Class Ryan Dickinson) [SEP] Regulations Licenses News Careers Places DNR County Glynn shellfish harvest area to re-open Brunswick, Ga. Thursday, November 7, 2019 The recreational shellfish harvest in area Glynn County south of Downing Musgrove Causeway between Jekyll Island and Brunswick will re-open to the public at 7 a.m. Nov. Friday, 8, 2019. Mark Williams, commissioner of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, signed an administrative order Thursday, Nov. 7, 2019, to re-open the area in Jointer Creek. The area was closed previously 3 Oct. due precautionary to concerns regarding from the capsized Motor Vessel Golden Ray in the Simons Sound. St. re-opening The comes after staff with DNR???€?s Resources Coastal Division surveyed and evaluated the area and observed sign no of visible contamination. The harvest area is also hydrologically isolated from St. the Simons by Sound major two tidal ???€? nodes one in the and Intracoastal Waterway the in other Cedar Creek east of Sidney the Lanier Bridge. October The closure of the area was made out of an abundance of caution following two significant releases pollutants of from the Golden Ray. At no time were observed pollutants in the shellfish harvest area. There have been no major pollution-related incidents involving the Golden Ray since Sept. 30. Shellfish may only harvested be with handheld implements. Harvesters may pick oysters before a half-hour sunrise until a half-hour after sunset. Oysters must measure no less than three inches from hinge to mouth, unless the oyster be cannot removed from a legal-size oyster without destroying it. Recreational quantity limit is two bushels of oysters per person, per day, with a maximum of six bushels per boat. Recreationally harvested oysters cannot be sold commercially. Harvesters have must a valid Georgia fishing license. The Golden Ray Sept. overturned 8 in the St. Simons Sound of south the St. Simons Pier. It was carrying crew, 24 were who all rescued, 4,151 vehicles and more than 350,000 gallons of fuel. To about date, 302,000 gallons of fuel have been safely removed from the ship. The response operation is being handled by the Command, Unified which made is of three entities: the responsible party, the U.S. Coast Guard and Georgia the Department of Natural Resources. Anyone with questions regarding the Unified may Command contact the command???€?s Joint Information at Center or 912-944-7122 visit For www.ssiresponse.com. a map the of Glynn County recreational shellfish harvest area, visit https://coastalgadnr.org/approvedrecharvestareas. For questions regarding the shellfish harvest re-opening, contact DNR???€?s Tyler Jones at 912-230-9709. Response [SEP] crews repel into hull the of M/V Golden Ray and clear a path for oil sheen equipment to safely oil remove from the steering gear room, St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Nov. 5, 2019. The pollution complex recovery and mitigation operations in a ship of this magnitude demands methodical planning meticulous and execution. [SEP] Date: 10.10.19 Contact:
On September 8, 2019, the USCG contacted the NOAA SSC to report a RORO vessel, the Golden Ray capsized had off Brunswick, Georgia. The vessel was on fire. USCG was conducting rescue operations. NOAA will provide an initial trajectory analysis and Resources at Risk report. The NWS is providing spot forecasts for the incident. [SEP] from DVIDS Coast Guard and crews port partners respond to disabled a vessel cargo with a fire on board September 2019, 8, in St. Simons Sound, Georgia. approximately At 2 a.m., Coast Guard Sector Charleston watch standers were notified of the M/V GOLDEN RAY, a 656???€? vehicle carrier, listing heavily in the St. Simons with Sound a total of 24 people on board; including 23 crew members and pilot. 1 (U.S. Coast Guard photo) [SEP] Coast Guard salvage and crews extracted the remaining four Golden crew Ray members Sept. 9, 2019, in St. Simons near Sound Brunswick, Georgia. The crew members were transported by a Coast Guard Station Brunswick 45-foot Response Boat-Medium boat crew to Glenn County EMS for further medical evaluation. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Coast Brunswick) Guard Station [SEP] From: A https://ssiresponse.com/ knuckle excavator boom picks up 1-to-3-inch rock-aggregate from a container barge in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Oct. 29, 2019. The excavator guided by sonar and GPS, strategically places the rock next to the hull the of M/V Golden Ray to slow erosion. Unit Manager Reid Jackson of the Georgia Environmental Protection walks Division, past a of mound gravel, Brunswick, Oct. Georgia, 25, 2019. The 1-to-3 inch rock-mixture was staged for deployment and later placed next to the hull of M/V the Golden Ray in order to slow down erosion around the vessel. Unified Command containment crews begin operations to reduce further erosion of the seafloor around the M/V Golden Ray in St. Simons Georgia, Sound, Oct. 29, 2019. Sonar and technology GPS a guide knuckle boom as excavator it places 1-to-3-inch rock-aggregate next to the hull of the vessel to slow erosion. [SEP] A diver descends down a ladder to inspect rock-aggregate placed around the M/V Golden Ray prevent to erosion and stabilize the wreck in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, 9, Nov. 2019. [SEP] Removal of rudder and propeller from the Golden Ray is complete. BRUNSWICK, Ga. ???€? The St. Simons Sound Incident Response Unified Command has successfully completed the removal of the rudder and propeller from the Golden Ray today. Crews over worked the past week to complete the operation which hampered was by weather adverse conditions at The times. removal of approximately 130 tons of weight will help reduce stresses to the hull of the wreck. of Portions the ship that are were removed being donated to the State of Georgia for as use artificial reefs areas in designated by Georgia the of Department Natural Resources. Crews work to remove the propeller from the Golden M/V Ray, St. Simons Sound, Dec. 20, 2019. Crews transfer the propeller from the M/V Golden Ray to the work barges for removal, safe St. Simons Sound, Dec. 2019. 20, remove Crews the rudder from the M/V Golden Ray and transfer it to the work barges for safe removal, St. Simons Dec. Sound, 20, 2019. This was entry posted in Incident Updates, News Releases, Response Imagery on 20, December 2019 12:15 PM. [SEP] Unified Continues Command St. Simons Sound Incident Response: Update 25 Date: 10.12.19 Contact: Joint Information Center 944-7122 (912) Unified Command has completed the lightering of the forward fuel oil tanks onboard the M/V Golden Ray. More 225,000 than gallons fuel of have been removed to date. Lightering of the remaining fuel and lubricant tanks continues. Maritime experts engaged in the response have determined that it is not possible to safely right and refloat the vessel in a fully intact condition. Unified Consequently, Command is developing to plans remove of all the M/V Golden Ray???€?s hull, components, and cargo by disassembling the vessel in place. This remains a complex situation but additional information about the removal the plan expected and timeline will be shared with the public as when and Pollution available. mitigation and response efforts continue will throughout the duration of the removal operation. priorities Unified Command???€?s are ensuring the safety of responders and the public, protecting the environment, and completing a full removal of the vessel. All involved parties in the are response fully committed to the successful completion these of operations. Specialists from the Unified Command are water conducting monitoring at 22 sites under a long term plan to ensure the of safety the public. The Georgia Department of Health has issued a swimming and fishing advisory, and members of the public are encouraged to visit the Georgia Department of Public website Health or call (844) for 863-0325 further public health information and advisories. Members of the public should not touch or oil attempt to rescue oiled birds or wildlife. They should instead report any sightings of oil to (800) 424-8802 and report any oiled wildlife to (800) 261-0980. A claims number been has established for those affected by the incident (888) 850-8486. [SEP] A Coast Guard Air Station Savannah MH-65 Dolphin helicopter lands on the side of the Golden Ray, a 656-foot vehicle carrier, to drop off supplies for Coast Guard crews and port partners who attempt to locate and the rescue remaining four crewmembers aboard the Golden Ray, Sept. 9, 2019, in Simons St. Sound, near Brunswick, Georgia. A Coast Guard Station Air Savannah MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrew, Brunswick boat Station crews and partners other port rescued 20 people morning the of Sept. after 8, it reported was the vessel was disabled and listing. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Ryan Dickinson) [SEP] Coast Guard and rescue crews, with along port partners, to attempt locate and rescue the remaining four crewmembers aboard the 656-foot vehicle carrier Golden Sept. Ray, 2019, 9, in St. Simons Sound, near Brunswick, Georgia. A Coast Guard Air Station Savannah MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrew, Station Brunswick crews boat other port and partners rescued 20 people the morning of Sept. 8, after it was reported the vessel was disabled and listing. (U.S. Coast Guard photo Petty by Officer 3rd Class Ryan Dickinson) [SEP] Regulations Licenses News Careers DNR Glynn Places County shellfish harvest area to re-open Brunswick, Ga. Thursday, November 7, 2019 The recreational shellfish harvest area in Glynn County south Downing Musgrove of Causeway between Jekyll and Island will Brunswick re-open to the public at 7 a.m. Friday, Nov. 8, 2019. Mark Williams, commissioner of the Georgia Department of signed Natural Resources, an administrative order Nov. Thursday, 7, 2019, to re-open area the in Jointer Creek. The was area previously closed 3 Oct. to due precautionary concerns regarding the from capsized Motor Vessel Golden Ray in the St. Simons Sound. The re-opening comes after staff with DNR???€?s Coastal Resources Division surveyed and evaluated the area observed and no sign of visible contamination. The harvest area is also isolated hydrologically from the St. Simons Sound by two major tidal nodes ???€? one in the Intracoastal Waterway and the other in Cedar east Creek of the Sidney Lanier Bridge. The October closure of the area was made out an of abundance of caution two following significant releases pollutants of from the Golden Ray. At no time were pollutants observed in the shellfish harvest area. There have been no major incidents pollution-related the involving Golden Ray since Sept. 30. Shellfish may only be harvested with handheld implements. Harvesters may oysters pick a half-hour before sunrise until a half-hour after sunset. Oysters must measure less no than three inches from hinge to mouth, unless the oyster cannot be removed from a legal-size oyster without destroying it. Recreational quantity limit is two bushels of oysters per person, per with day, a maximum of six bushels per boat. Recreationally harvested cannot oysters be sold commercially. Harvesters must have a valid Georgia fishing The license. Golden Ray overturned Sept. 8 in the St. Simons Sound south of the Simons St. Pier. It was carrying 24 crew, who were all rescued, 4,151 vehicles and more than gallons 350,000 of fuel. To about date, 302,000 gallons of fuel have been safely removed from the ship. The response operation is being handled by the Unified Command, which is of made three entities: responsible the party, the U.S. Coast Guard and the Georgia Department of Resources. Natural Anyone questions with the regarding Unified Command may contact the command???€?s Information Joint Center at 912-944-7122 visit or www.ssiresponse.com. For a map of the Glynn County recreational shellfish harvest area, For visit https://coastalgadnr.org/approvedrecharvestareas. questions regarding the shellfish harvest contact re-opening, DNR???€?s Tyler Jones at 912-230-9709. [SEP] Response crews repel into the hull M/V of Golden Ray and clear a path oil for spill equipment to safely oil remove from steering gear the room, St. Simons Georgia, Sound, 5, Nov. 2019. The pollution complex recovery and mitigation operations a in ship of magnitude this demands methodical planning and meticulous execution. [SEP] Date: 10.10.19 Contact:
On September 8, 2019, the USCG contacted the NOAA SSC to report a RORO vessel, the Ray Golden capsized had off Brunswick, Georgia. The boat was on fire. USCG conducting was rescue operations. NOAA will provide an initial trajectory analysis Resources and at Risk report. The NWS is spot providing forecasts for the incident. [SEP] from Coast DVIDS Guard crews and port respond partners to a cargo disabled vessel with a fire on board September 8, 2019, in Simons St. Sound, Georgia. At approximately 2 a.m., Coast Guard Sector Charleston watch standers were notified of the M/V GOLDEN RAY, a 656???€? vehicle carrier, listing heavily the St. in Simons Sound with a total of 24 people on board; 23 including members crew and 1 pilot. (U.S. Coast Guard photo) [SEP] Guard Coast and salvage crews extracted the remaining four Golden Ray crew members Sept. 2019, 9, in St. Simons Sound near Brunswick, Georgia. The crew members were by transported a Coast Guard Station 45-foot Brunswick Response Boat-Medium boat crew to Glenn County EMS for medical further evaluation. Coast (U.S. Guard photo by Coast Guard Station Brunswick) [SEP] From: https://ssiresponse.com/ A knuckle boom excavator picks up 1-to-3-inch rock-aggregate from a container in barge Simons St. Sound, Georgia, Oct. 29, 2019. The excavator guided by and sonar GPS, strategically places the rock next to the hull of the M/V Golden Ray to slow erosion. Unit Manager Reid Jackson of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, walks past a mound of gravel, Brunswick, Georgia, Oct. 2019. 25, 1-to-3 The inch rock-mixture was staged for deployment later and placed next to hull the of the Ray M/V Golden in order to slow down erosion around the vessel. Unified Command response crews begin operations to further reduce erosion of the seafloor around the M/V Golden Ray in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Oct. 29, 2019. Sonar and GPS technology a guide boom knuckle excavator as it places 1-to-3-inch rock-aggregate next to hull the the of to vessel erosion. slow [SEP] A diver descends down a ladder to inspect rock-aggregate placed around the M/V Golden Ray to prevent erosion and stabilize the wreck in St. Simons Sound, Georgia, Nov. 9, 2019. [SEP] Removal of rudder and propeller from the Golden Ray is complete. BRUNSWICK, Ga. ???€? The St. Simons Sound Incident Response Unified Command has successfully completed the removal of the rudder and propeller from the Golden Ray today. Crews worked over the past week to complete the operation which was hampered by adverse weather conditions at times. The removal of approximately 130 tons weight of will help reduce stresses to the hull of the wreck. Portions of the ship that were removed are donated being to the State of Georgia for as use artificial reefs in areas designated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Crews work to remove the propeller from the M/V Golden Ray, Simons St. Sound, 20, Dec. 2019. Crews transfer the propeller from the M/V Golden Ray to the work barges for safe removal, Simons St. Sound, Dec. 20, 2019. Crews remove the rudder from the M/V Ray Golden and it transfer to the work barges for safe removal, St. Simons Sound, 20, Dec. 2019. This entry was posted in Incident Updates, News Releases, Response Imagery on December 20, 2019 12:15 PM. [SEP] Unified Command Continues St. Simons Sound Incident Response: 25 Update Date: 10.12.19 Contact: Joint Information Center (912) 944-7122 Unified Command has completed the lightering of the oil forward fuel tanks onboard the M/V Golden Ray. More than 225,000 gallons of fuel have been removed to date. Lightering of the remaining fuel and tanks lubricant continues. Maritime experts engaged in response the have determined that it is not possible to safely right and refloat the vessel a in fully intact Consequently, condition. Unified Command is developing plans to remove all of the Golden M/V Ray???€?s hull, and cargo components, by disassembling the vessel in This place. remains a complex situation but additional information about removal the plan and the expected timeline will be shared with the public as and when available. Pollution mitigation and response efforts will continue the throughout duration of the removal operation. Command???€?s Unified priorities ensuring are the safety of responders and the protecting public, the environment, and completing a removal full of the All vessel. parties involved in the response are fully committed to the successful of completion these operations. Specialists from the Unified Command are conducting monitoring water at 22 sites under a long term plan to ensure the safety of public. the The Georgia Department of Health has issued a swimming and fishing advisory, and members of the public encouraged are to visit the Department Georgia of Public Health website or (844) call 863-0325 for further public health information and advisories. Members of the public should not touch oil or attempt to rescue oiled birds or wildlife. They should instead report any sightings of oil to (800) 424-8802 and report any oiled wildlife to (800) 261-0980. A number claims been has established for affected those by the incident (888) 850-8486. [SEP] A Coast Guard Air Station MH-65 Savannah Dolphin helicopter on lands the of side the Golden Ray, a 656-foot vehicle carrier, drop to off supplies for Coast Guard crews and port partners who attempt to locate and rescue the four remaining crewmembers aboard the Golden Ray, Sept. 9, in 2019, St. Simons Sound, near Brunswick, Georgia. A Coast Guard Air Station Savannah MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrew, Station Brunswick boat crews other and port partners rescued 20 people the morning of Sept. 8, after it was reported vessel the was disabled and listing. (U.S. Guard Coast photo by Petty Officer 3rd Class Dickinson) Ryan [SEP] Coast and Guard rescue crews, along with port partners, attempt to locate and rescue the remaining four crewmembers aboard the 656-foot vehicle carrier Golden Ray, Sept. 9, 2019, in St. Simons Sound, near Brunswick, Georgia. A Coast Guard Station Savannah Air MH-65 Dolphin helicopter aircrew, Station Brunswick boat crews and other port partners rescued 20 the people morning of Sept. 8, after it was reported the vessel was disabled listing. and (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Officer Petty 3rd Class Ryan Dickinson) [SEP] Regulations Licenses News Places Careers Glynn DNR shellfish County harvest area to re-open Brunswick, Ga. Thursday, November 7, 2019 The recreational shellfish harvest area in Glynn County south of Downing Musgrove Causeway Jekyll between Island and Brunswick will re-open the to public at 7 Friday, a.m. Nov. 8, 2019. Mark Williams, commissioner of the Georgia Department Natural of Resources, signed an order administrative Thursday, Nov. 7, 2019, to the area re-open in Jointer Creek. The area was previously closed Oct. 3 to due concerns precautionary regarding from the capsized Motor Vessel Golden Ray in the St. Simons The Sound. comes re-opening after staff with DNR???€?s Coastal Resources Division surveyed and evaluated the area and observed no sign of visible contamination. The harvest area is also hydrologically isolated from the St. Simons Sound by two major tidal nodes ???€? one in the Intracoastal Waterway and other the in Cedar Creek east of Sidney the Lanier Bridge. The October of closure the area was made out of an abundance of caution following two significant releases of from pollutants the Golden Ray. At time no were pollutants observed in the shellfish harvest area. There have been no major pollution-related incidents involving the Golden Ray since Sept. 30. Shellfish may only be harvested with handheld implements. Harvesters may oysters a pick half-hour before sunrise until half-hour after a sunset. Oysters measure must no less than three inches from hinge to mouth, unless the oyster cannot be removed from a legal-size oyster without destroying it. Recreational quantity limit is two bushels of oysters per person, per day, with a maximum of six bushels per Recreationally boat. harvested oysters cannot be sold commercially. must Harvesters have a valid Georgia fishing license. The Golden Ray overturned Sept. in 8 the St. Simons Sound south of the St. Simons Pier. It was carrying 24 crew, were who all rescued, 4,151 and vehicles more than 350,000 gallons fuel. of To date, about 302,000 gallons of fuel have been safely removed from the ship. The response operation is being handled the by Unified Command, which is made of three entities: the party, responsible the Coast U.S. Guard and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Anyone with questions regarding the Unified Command may contact the command???€?s Joint Information at Center 912-944-7122 visit or www.ssiresponse.com. a For map of the Glynn County shellfish recreational harvest area, visit https://coastalgadnr.org/approvedrecharvestareas. questions For regarding shellfish the harvest re-opening, contact DNR???€?s Tyler Jones at 912-230-9709. [SEP] Response crews repel into the hull of M/V Golden Ray and clear a path for oil sheen equipment to safely oil remove from steering the room, gear St. Simons Sound, Georgia, 5, Nov. 2019. The complex pollution and recovery operations mitigation in a ship of this magnitude demands methodical planning and meticulous execution. [SEP] Date: 10.10.19 Contact:
This hotline was to capture opened response information for Hurricane Michael. USCG Mobile has set Port Condition X Ray for all ports and the from GIWW to Gulfport Port Panama City. At 1800c, Port condition Yankee will be put in place for all these areas as well.
This hotline was opened to capture response information for Michael. Hurricane USCG Mobile has set Port Condition X Ray for all ports and the GIWW from Gulfport to City. Port Panama At 1800c, Port condition Yankee will be put in place for these all areas as well.
This hotline was opened capture to information response for Hurricane Michael. USCG Mobile has set Port Condition X Ray for all ports and the GIWW from Gulfport to Port Panama City. At 1800c, Port condition Yankee will be put in place for all these areas as well.
On April 7, 2017, the USCG Sector San Francisco contacted the NOAA SSC to report that a 112’ x 52’ deck and barge crane had and capsized sunk around midnight, just east of Yerba Buena Island in San Francisco Bay. The barge and crane reportedly roughly had 4,000 gallons of diesel and 300 gallons of hydraulic fluid on-board the at time of sinking. The and barge crane had been working the on BART (Bay Area Rapid Transit) subway tube under the Bay prior to the sinking, but BART officials reported have no known to compromise the BART system. transit Sector San Francisco requested oil fate & trajectory support.
7, On April 2017, the Sector USCG San Francisco contacted the SSC NOAA report to that a 112’ x 52’ deck barge and crane capsized had and sunk around midnight, east just of Yerba Buena Island in San Francisco Bay. The barge and crane reportedly had roughly 4,000 gallons of diesel and 300 gallons of hydraulic fluid on-board at the time of sinking. crane The and barge had been working on the BART (Bay Area Transit) Rapid subway tube under the Bay prior to the sinking, but BART officials have reported no known damage to the BART system. transit Sector San Francisco requested oil fate & trajectory support.
On April 7, 2017, the USCG Sector San contacted Francisco the SSC NOAA to report that a 112’ x 52’ deck barge and crane had capsized and sunk around midnight, just east of Yerba Buena Island in San Francisco Bay. The barge and crane reportedly had 4,000 roughly gallons of diesel and 300 gallons of hydraulic fluid at on-board the time of sinking. The crane and barge had working on been the BART (Bay Area Rapid Transit) subway tube the under Bay prior to the sinking, but BART officials have reported no known damage to the BART system. transit Sector San Francisco requested product fate & trajectory support.
On 14, December 2015, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator for California was notified by USCG of containers lost from the Matson Ship Container MANOA. On Friday, December 11, the MANOA departed the Port of Oakland bound for Seattle. While maneuvering to disembark the San Francisco based pilot, the boat rolled in rough seas and containers 12 were believed lost about overboard 8 miles outside the Golden Gate. At least one container has washed and ashore broken open. The USCG requested NOAA assistance in tracking remaining the containers.
On December 14, 2015, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator for California was notified by USCG of containers lost from the Matson Container Ship MANOA. On Friday, December 11, the MANOA departed the Port of bound Oakland Seattle. for While maneuvering to disembark the San Francisco based pilot, the ship rolled in rough and seas containers 12 were believed lost overboard about 8 miles outside the Golden Gate. At least one container has washed ashore and broken open. The USCG NOAA requested assistance tracking in remaining containers. the
On December 14, 2015, the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator for California was notified by USCG of containers lost from the Matson Container Ship MANOA. On Friday, December 11, the MANOA departed the Port of Oakland bound for Seattle. maneuvering While to disembark the San Francisco pilot, based the tanker rolled in rough seas and 12 containers were believed lost overboard about miles 8 outside the Golden Gate. At one least container has ashore washed broken and open. USCG The requested NOAA assistance in the tracking remaining containers.
On 6, May 2015, the USCG Puget Sector Sound notified NOAA of an overturned skiff near La Push, Wa. The tanker was heavily encrusted with marine and growth potentially from the Japan tsunami. NOAA The Marine Debris Program was notified.
On May 6, 2015, the USCG Sector Puget Sound NOAA notified of an overturned skiff near Push, La The Wa. vessel was heavily encrusted with marine growth and potentially from the Japan tsunami. The NOAA Debris Marine Program was notified.
On 6, May 2015, USCG the Sector Puget Sound notified NOAA of an overturned skiff near La Push, Wa. The vessel was heavily encrusted with marine growth and potentially from the tsunami. Japan The NOAA Marine Debris was Program notified.
On April 27, 2015, the USCG notified NOAA of an abandoned hull floating off the Oregon Coast. The vessel is approximately 18ft long has and heavy marine growth. It is suspected to be Japan tsunami marine debris.
On April 27, 2015, the USCG notified NOAA of an abandoned hull floating off the Oregon Coast. The vessel is approximately 18ft long and has heavy marine growth. It is suspected be to Japan tsunami marine debris.
On April 27, 2015, the USCG notified NOAA of an abandoned hull floating off the Oregon Coast. The vessel is approximately long 18ft and has heavy marine growth. is It suspected to be Japan marine tsunami debris.
On Sector 28Aug12, USCG New Orleans contacted the SSC NOAA for a trajectory for a drifting floating dry dock, 650'long x Dry 137'wide. dock is owned by Southern Recycling, who was towing to it a "breaking yard" when the tow cable parted. Draft of the dry dock is reported as 7', and height of the wing walls is as estimated 35' (based on discussion with a Tampa dry dock company). Below are the last known positions drift and speed and direction from 27 AUG. 1430 pos'n: 27-57.478 089-43.403W, Course 220T, 3kts 1630 (radar) pos'n: 27-41N Course 089-56W, 220T, 4kts 2030 (radar) 27-34N pos'n: 090-08W, Course 220T, 4kts (DR) 2230 pos'n: 27-30N 090-13W, Wind NNE 35-40kts (DR)
On 28Aug12, Sector USCG New contacted Orleans the NOAA SSC for a trajectory for a drifting floating dock, dry 650'long x 137'wide. Dry dock is owned Southern Recycling, by who was towing it to a "breaking yard" when the tow cable parted. Draft of the dry dock is reported as 7', and height of wing the walls is estimated as (based 35' on discussion with a Tampa dry dock company). Below are the last known and positions drift speed and direction from 27 AUG. 1430 pos'n: 27-57.478 089-43.403W, 220T, Course 3kts (radar) 1630 pos'n: 27-41N 089-56W, 220T, Course 4kts (radar) 2030 pos'n: 27-34N 090-08W, Course 4kts 220T, (DR) 2230 pos'n: 27-30N 090-13W, Wind NNE 35-40kts (DR)
On 28Aug12, USCG Sector New Orleans the contacted SSC NOAA for a trajectory for a drifting floating dock, dry 650'long x 137'wide. Dry dock is by owned Southern Recycling, who was towing it a to yard" "breaking when the tow cable parted. Draft of the dry dock is as reported 7', and height of the wing walls is estimated as 35' (based on discussion with a Tampa dry dock company). Below are the last known positions drift and speed and direction from 27 AUG. 1430 pos'n: 27-57.478 089-43.403W, Course 220T, 3kts (radar) 1630 pos'n: 27-41N 089-56W, Course 220T, 4kts (radar) 2030 27-34N pos'n: 090-08W, Course 220T, 4kts (DR) 2230 pos'n: 27-30N 090-13W, Wind NNE 35-40kts (DR)
On 27JAN12 at 17:30, USCG Sector Corpus Christi contacted NOAA SSC about a report came that in at 16:00 a of 55 gl barrel floating in the Gulf of Mexico. The barrel has approx 1 inch exposed water's above the surface. The barrel has no markings and unknown contents. USCG is requesting a model. trajectory
On 27JAN12 at 17:30, USCG Sector Corpus Christi contacted NOAA SSC about a report that came in at 16:00 of a 55 gl barrel floating in the Gulf of Mexico. The barrel has approx 1 inch above exposed the water's surface. The has barrel no markings and unknown contents. is USCG requesting a trajectory model.
On at 27JAN12 17:30, USCG Sector Corpus Christi contacted NOAA SSC about a report that at came in 16:00 a of 55 gl barrel floating in the Gulf of Mexico. The barrel has approx 1 inch exposed above the water's surface. The barrel has no markings unknown and contents. USCG is requesting a trajectory model.
On June 28, 2022, NOAA Fisheries received a report a of dead killer entangled whale floating approx. 30 miles Southwest offshore Newport, of Oregon and contacted the NOAA NW SSC to request a drift model see to if the whale will go ashore and where they may be able to locate it for sampling.
On June 28, 2022, NOAA Fisheries received a report of a dead entangled whale killer floating approx. 30 offshore miles Southwest of Newport, Oregon and contacted the NOAA NW to SSC request a drift model to see if the whale will ashore go and where they may be able to locate for it sampling.
On June 28, NOAA 2022, Fisheries received a report of a entangled dead killer whale floating approx. miles 30 offshore Southwest of Newport, Oregon and contacted the NOAA SSC NW to request a drift model to see if the whale go will ashore and where they may be able to locate it for sampling.
In the evening of 16-APR-2019, NMFS Stranding Network contacted staff their NOAA SSC regarding a gray whale carcass that had washed ashore Pacifica, near CA. A field necropsy is scheduled for 17-APR-2019, which after the carcass would be towed offshore. NMFS requested carcass a estimate drift to aid in how determining far offshore to tow the carcass so it does not re-beach in the upcoming days.
In the evening of 16-APR-2019, NMFS Stranding Network staff contacted their NOAA SSC regarding whale a that gray carcass had washed ashore near Pacifica, CA. A field necropsy is scheduled for 17-APR-2019, after which the carcass would be towed offshore. NMFS requested a carcass drift estimate to aid in determining far how offshore to tow the carcass so it does re-beach not in the upcoming days.
In the evening of NMFS 16-APR-2019, Stranding staff Network contacted their NOAA SSC regarding a whale gray carcass that had washed ashore near Pacifica, A CA. field necropsy is scheduled for 17-APR-2019, after which the carcass would be towed offshore. NMFS requested carcass a drift estimate to aid in determining how far offshore to tow the carcass so it does not re-beach the in upcoming days.
On June 1, 2016, the National Fisheries Marine Service contacted ERD with a request for a hindcast of a whale carcass found near Chatham, MA, on May 2016. 5,
On June 1, 2016, the Marine National Fisheries Service contacted ERD with a request for a hindcast of a carcass whale found near Chatham, MA, on May 5, 2016.
On June 1, 2016, the National Marine Fisheries Service contacted ERD with a request for a hindcast of a carcass whale found Chatham, near MA, on May 5, 2016.
On May 23, 2014, the NMFS Stranding Coordinator contacted ERD to request a estimate drift for a 22 Humpback foot whale novaeangliae) (Megaptera carcass that had washed up at the entrance to Pillar Point Harbor, CA.
On May 23, 2014, the NMFS Stranding Coordinator contacted ERD to request a drift estimate for a 22 foot Humpback whale (Megaptera novaeangliae) that carcass had washed up at the entrance to Pillar Point Harbor, CA.
On May 23, 2014, the NMFS Stranding Coordinator contacted ERD to request a drift estimate for a 22 foot Humpback whale (Megaptera novaeangliae) carcass that had up washed at the to entrance Point Pillar Harbor, CA.
On May 21, 2014, the Marine National Fisheries Service contacted the Response Emergency Division with request for trajectory support for a stranded whale carcass
On May 21, 2014, the National Marine Fisheries Service contacted the Emergency Response with Division request for trajectory support a for stranded whale carcass
21, On May 2014, the National Marine Fisheries Service contacted the Emergency Response Division with request for trajectory support for a stranded whale carcass
5:26 At PM (local time) on 10 2008, June USCG the the notified NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a grounded sperm whale Port near Aransas, Texas. At that time, the whale was reported alive and the USCG was seeking guidance. [SEP] At PM 5:26 (local time) on 10 June 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a grounded sperm near whale Port Aransas, Texas. At that time, whale was the reported alive and the was USCG guidance. seeking The SSC contacted Jeansonne, Jim a member of the ERD SSC to team, coordinate the consultation with the Marine Mammal Stranding network and the USCG Sector Corpus Christi. Follow up communications with the USCG by the SSC confirmed that the NMFS was engaged. It was reported also that whale, the a 27-foot female, was euthanized, and a necropsy would be performed the following day. Unless the situation changes, this report will constitute the initial and final hotline entry. Additional Information About Sperm Whales Once quite common in the Gulf of Mexico, sperm whales are now only occasionally observed. They are listed as endangered species ESA under and under protected the Marine Mammal Protection Act. Sperm whales can swim down to depths greater than meters; 3,000 apparently, limited depth in only by the time it takes to swim down and back to the surface. They are the largest of all toothed whales, them making the Earth's largest living carnivore. Sperm whales feed mainly on squid (including colossal squid and giant the squid), octopus and deepwater fishes, but it also reported to feed on sharks and skates. The scientific name correct for the sperm whale is currently unclear or under debate. The is species generally known as catodon, Physeter but Physeter macrocephalus is the most name commonly listed by NOAA. A of total 17 sperm whale strandings were documented in the northern Gulf of Mexico between and 1997 2002. The best estimate of abundance of sperm the whales in the northern Gulf Mexico of was approximately 1,300 whales in 2003 (NOAA report). Probably the most sperm remembered whale grounding was in when 1970, a dead, 45-foot whale of this species beached in Oregon. This was the whale that filled was with a half-ton of dynamite and exploded???€? you have probably seen the video. For more information on these unique marine animals, the view following site: web http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/species/mammals/cetaceans/spermwhale.htm
5:26 At PM (local time) on 10 June 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of a grounded sperm near whale Aransas, Port Texas. At that time, the was reported whale alive and the USCG was seeking guidance. [SEP] At 5:26 PM (local time) on 10 June 2008, the USCG notified the Scientific NOAA Support Coordinator (SSC) of a grounded sperm near whale Port Aransas, Texas. At that time, the whale was reported alive and USCG the was seeking guidance. The SSC contacted Jim Jeansonne, a member of the SSC ERD team, to coordinate the consultation with the Marine Mammal network Stranding and USCG the Sector Corpus Christi. Follow up communications with the USCG by SSC the confirmed that NMFS the was engaged. It was also reported that the whale, a 27-foot female, was euthanized, and a necropsy would be performed the following day. Unless the situation changes, this will report constitute the initial and final entry. hotline Additional Information About Sperm Whales Once quite common in the Gulf of Mexico, sperm whales are only now occasionally They observed. are listed as endangered species under ESA and protected under the Marine Mammal Protection Act. Sperm whales can swim down to depths greater than meters; 3,000 apparently, limited in depth only by the time it takes to swim down and back surface. to They the are the largest of all toothed whales, making them the Earth's largest living carnivore. Sperm whales feed mainly squid on (including colossal squid and the giant squid), octopus and deepwater fishes, it but also reported to feed sharks on and skates. The correct name scientific the for sperm whale is currently unclear or under debate. The species is generally known as Physeter catodon, but Physeter macrocephalus is the name most commonly listed by NOAA. A total of 17 sperm strandings whale were documented in the northern Gulf of Mexico between 1997 and 2002. The best estimate of the abundance of sperm in whales the northern Gulf Mexico of was approximately whales 1,300 in 2003 (NOAA report). Probably the most sperm remembered grounding whale was 1970, in when a 45-foot dead, whale of this species beached in Oregon. This was the that whale was filled with a half-ton of dynamite and exploded???€? you have seen probably the video. For information more on these unique marine animals, view the following web site: http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/species/mammals/cetaceans/spermwhale.htm
At PM 5:26 time) (local 10 on June 2008, the USCG notified the NOAA Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) of grounded a sperm whale near Port Aransas, Texas. At that time, the whale was reported alive and the USCG was guidance. seeking [SEP] At 5:26 PM (local time) on 10 June 2008, USCG notified the the NOAA Support Scientific Coordinator (SSC) of a grounded sperm whale near Port Aransas, Texas. At that time, the was whale reported alive and the USCG was seeking guidance. The SSC contacted Jim Jeansonne, a member of the ERD SSC team, to coordinate the consultation with the Marine Mammal Stranding network and the USCG Sector Corpus Christi. Follow up with communications the USCG by the SSC confirmed that the NMFS was engaged. It was also reported that the whale, a 27-foot female, was euthanized, and a necropsy would be performed the following day. Unless the changes, situation report this will constitute the and initial final hotline Additional Information entry. About Sperm Whales Once quite common in the of Gulf Mexico, sperm whales are now only occasionally observed. They are listed as endangered species under ESA and protected under the Marine Mammal Act. Protection Sperm whales can swim down to depths greater than 3,000 meters; apparently, limited in depth only by the it time takes to swim down and back to the surface. They are the largest of all toothed whales, making them the Earth's largest living carnivore. Sperm whales feed mainly on (including squid colossal squid and the giant squid), octopus and deepwater fishes, but it also reported to feed on and sharks skates. The correct scientific name for the sperm whale is currently unclear or under debate. The species is generally known as catodon, Physeter but Physeter macrocephalus the is name most commonly listed by NOAA. A 17 total of sperm whale were strandings documented in northern the Gulf of Mexico between and 1997 2002. The best estimate of the abundance sperm of whales in the northern of Mexico Gulf was approximately 1,300 whales in 2003 (NOAA report). Probably the most remembered sperm whale grounding was in 1970, when a dead, 45-foot whale of this species beached in Oregon. This was the that whale was filled with half-ton a of dynamite and exploded???€? have you probably seen the video. For more information on these unique marine animals, view the following web site: http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/species/mammals/cetaceans/spermwhale.htm
Request came to Steve from Marine Mammal Stranding Response Coordinator in NE to do a hindcast a on bloated, dead whale. Whale was sighted on May 30. [SEP] estimate Hindcast [SEP] Photo from Marine Stranding Mammal Response Coordinator.
Request came to Steve from Marine Mammal Stranding Response Coordinator in NE to do hindcast a on a bloated, dead whale. Whale was on sighted May 30. [SEP] Hindcast estimate [SEP] Photo from Mammal Marine Stranding Response Coordinator.
Request came to Steve from Marine Mammal Response Stranding Coordinator in NE to do a hindcast on a bloated, dead whale. Whale was sighted on May 30. [SEP] estimate Hindcast [SEP] Photo from Marine Mammal Stranding Coordinator. Response
On 14 May 2007, two humpback whales (Megaptera were novaeangliae) within observed the Sacramento River upstream Rio of Vista, CA. NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Services, Marine The Mammal Center, the U.S. Coast Guard, California Department of Fish and Game, and the Governor's Office of Emergency responded Services and coordinated rescue operations. 27MAY2007, By the whales had moved downstream of the Rio Vista Bridge, lingered near the Benicia Bridge on 28MAY and on continued to the Pacific on 29MAY. [SEP] The dorsal and fin right side of the female cow, showing the skin lesions, taken on May 28, 2007. This photo was 48 hours after administration of antibiotics and 24 hours after the whales' return to saline more water. Photo by: Wilson, Bob The Marine Center. Mammal [SEP] Photo of the cow with showing skin blowhole lesions similar to and partial calf, view of the wound. Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA/NMFS [SEP] Sunday May 20, 7:30 p.m. At approximately 2:30 today, p.m. the two humpback whales that have been in swimming the West Sacramento turning basin started moving down the Sacramento Channel. The whales' action may have been in response to two tugs moving down the channel to assist a commercial ship docking at the Agrium dock just south of the port. Officials are moving quickly to try and take advantage of this unexpected development by rushing to the whales boats that will be used to the help keep animals from entering the sloughs and tributaries beginning at the river's delta near Rio Vista. The animals are being followed by various vessels from the of Coast Guard, Fish and Game and and Yolo Sacramento county sheriffs departments. The whales were 14.5 miles south of the Port of at Sacramento 7:00 p.m. [SEP] Update on the whale rescue efforts from the Joint Information Center: ********************************************************* Wednesday, On May 23rd, the rescue team attempted multiple strategies to try and help coax the whales of out the River and the towards ocean: * In the the morning, deployed team vessels several on water the and the exposed team the whales to sounds by banging pipes on and having a tug boat maneuver in the area. The whales did not respond hoped, as they and remained in the general area of the Rio Vista Bridge. * In the afternoon, the team employed a new strategy playing by different sounds to the whales: (1) recordings of humpback whales feeding in Monterey Bay, (2) recordings of killer whales attacking a gray whale cow/calf pair off shoreline the of California, and (3) synthesized tonal sounds generated in laboratory a (similar to a car alarm). The whales not did respond to these playbacks either. As a result, the plan for Thursday, May 24th is to continue the visual assessments health and observations behavioral to monitor whale's the condition. sounds No will be used. The veterinarians and biologists on believe site that the whales need day a without excessive [SEP] stimuli. Hi All, just I talked with Frances PM (4:25 Sunday). The decided whales to move on their own. They are 5 miles the down channel right now and still going the right direction. Frances with is about 8 small boats following They along. picked up the pipes a little while ago but have not had to use them yet. My understanding is they never even brought the big ship up into the harbor. thinking We're we might just press the animals throughout the night, but we'll see what happens as it starts to get dark. they Hopefully will continue downriver and we'll just pick them up as we go along. Maybe they might even swim all way the out without our Wouldn't help. that be nice. You know you can make the best plan in the world, and have the training all sessions set up, and the then animals are just going to what do they're going to do. Fortunately they are doing exactly the right thing right now. Laurie J. Gage, D.V.M. APHIS USDA Cat Large Specialist [SEP] humpback The whale calf breaches with windsurfers off of Sherman Island in the Sacramento River. Photo by Wilkin, Sarah NOAA Fisheries Service [SEP] calf The displaying behavior the known as tailslapping or lobtailing, which has it done periodically over the past three (primarily days observed at sunrise sunset and when observers were present at those times). Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA/NMFS [SEP] Left lateral view of the calf's dorsal fin. views Such are often used for identifying individual whales. (photo credit - The Marine Mammal Center) [SEP] The adult female humpback after her first antibiotic injection on 5/26/07. The syringe remained after the injection, but later fell out on its own. The cow a received total of 3 injections, and the calf received 1, to deliver the appropriate dose of the antibiotic. Photo by Bob Wilson, The Marine Mammal Center. [SEP] Following is the press release issued by the Joint Information Center Wednesday, on May 30, 2007: ***************************************************** After 3-week Inland Journey Wandering Whales Return the to Sea After almost three weeks meandering through Sacramento the River Delta, the wayward mother humpback whale and calf her that have been the of subject concern intense and dedicated a rescue effort, have apparently passed safely under the Golden Gate Bridge and back out to the Pacific Ocean. "A number of firsts were made during this operation," said Dr. Frances Director Gulland, of Veterinary at Science The Marine Mammal Center in Sausalito, who was the lead for veterinarian the team. rescue "This was the first time antibiotics have been administered to free swimming whales in the wild, and was made possible by generous donations from Bayer Pfizer, and Grandpa's Compounding Pharmacy, and the development of a new made custom delivery remote device by to PAXARMS successfully administer the medicine. The antibiotics will help the animals fight infections and enhance their recovery from the wounds they sustained from a vessel collision." The National Oceanic and Atmospheric (NOAA) Administration's National Marine Fisheries Service, Marine The Mammal Center in Sausalito, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), California Department of Fish and Game (DFG), the and Office Governor's of Emergency Services (OES) established a unified command to monitor and assist the whales, coordinate rescue operations, and ensure safety their and of public the and rescue team members. "We extremely are grateful for the tremendous outpouring of support that we received from our partners and the local communities from San Francisco to Sacramento who helped these whales," said Dr. Rowles, Teri Director of NOAA's Mammal Marine Health and Stranding Response "A Program. number veterinarians of and mammal marine biologist were on scene to provide their expertise and assistance, and we consulted with experts numerous around the world on this case. The strong partnerships between federal, the state and authorities local non-profit and organizations allowed us to not only assist whales, these but to collect scientific also information that help will support the conservation and recovery of marine mammals in California and elsewhere." Rescue operations included utilizing DFG, Solano Sheriff's County NOAA's Department, Southwest Regional and Office, USCG boats to maintain 500-yard a around perimeter the whales to minimize disturbance of the whales and potential with collisions the whales. In addition, a 1,000-foot temporary flight was restriction established to further prevent disturbance of the whales. Ferry, tug, and other vessel operators were provided up-to-date information on whales' the position this throughout event so that operators could travel safely through areas. Timeline May 13 -- Whales were first observed near Benicia. May 14 Whales - spotted were further inland in the Sacramento River Delta near Rio Vista. May 15 -- 19 -- made Whales their up way the shipping channel to the Port of Sacramento turning basin and circled in the area for several days. made Scientists efforts to lure the whales out toward Pacific the Ocean using underwater broadcasts of whale humpback feeding and socialization sounds. 20 May - Starting at 2:30 p.m. and for extending more 6 than hours, the traveled whales approximately miles 25 down the Sacramento Channel to the Rio Vista area. The whales started their trek the down river after two moved tugs down the channel assist to a commercial vessel. May 21 - 26 The - whales remained north of the Rio Bridge Vista for 5 days. were Efforts made to herd the whales using pipe-banging (Oikami) other and sounds. Scientists took a skin sample of the female whale. Because the animals in were fresh water for a long time, biologists became increasingly concerned about the health of the whales after especially observing deterioration of their skin and condition wounds. these For reasons, on Saturday, 26, May the animal care team administered antibiotics to both the mother whale and her calf. This was the first time antibiotics were administered to free-swimming large whales in the May wild. 27 - One week after the initial movement the south, whales under passed Vista the Rio bridge around 1:30 pm and traveled approximately 25 miles toward the ocean,
On 14 May 2007, two humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) were observed within the Sacramento River upstream of Rio Vista, CA. NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Services, The Marine Mammal Center, the U.S. Coast Guard, California Department of Fish and Game, and the Governor's Office of Emergency Services responded and coordinated rescue operations. By 27MAY2007, the whales moved had downstream of the Rio Vista Bridge, lingered near the Benicia Bridge on 28MAY and continued on to the Pacific on 29MAY. [SEP] The dorsal fin and right side of the female cow, showing the lesions, taken skin on May 28, 2007. This photo was 48 hours after administration of antibiotics and 24 hours after the whales' return more to water. saline Photo by: Bob Wilson, The Marine Mammal Center. [SEP] Photo of the cow with blowhole showing skin lesions similar to calf, and partial view of the wound. Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA/NMFS [SEP] Sunday May 20, 7:30 p.m. At approximately p.m. 2:30 today, the two humpback whales have that swimming been in the West Sacramento turning basin started moving down the Sacramento Channel. The action whales' may have been in response to two tugs moving down the channel assist to a commercial docking vessel at the Agrium dock just south of the port. Officials quickly to moving are try and take advantage of this unexpected development by rushing to the whales boats that will used be to help keep the animals from entering the sloughs tributaries and beginning at the river's delta Rio near Vista. The being animals are followed by various vessels from the of Guard, Coast Fish and and Game Yolo and Sacramento sheriffs county departments. The whales 14.5 were south miles of the Port of Sacramento at 7:00 p.m. [SEP] Update the on whale rescue efforts from the Joint Information Center: ********************************************************* On Wednesday, May 23rd, the rescue team multiple attempted strategies to try and help coax the whales out of the River and towards the ocean: * In the morning, the team deployed several vessels on the and water the team exposed whales the to sounds by banging on pipes and having a tug boat maneuver in the area. The whales did not respond as hoped, and remained they in the general area of the Rio Vista Bridge. * In the afternoon, the team employed a new strategy by playing different sounds to the whales: (1) recordings of humpback whales feeding in Monterey Bay, (2) recordings of killer whales attacking gray a whale cow/calf pair off the coastline of California, and (3) synthesized tonal sounds generated in a laboratory (similar to alarm). a car The whales did not respond these to playbacks either. As a result, the plan Thursday, for 24th May is to continue the visual health assessments and observations behavioral to monitor the whale's condition. No sounds will be used. The veterinarians and biologists on site believe that the whales need a day without excessive stimuli. [SEP] Hi All, I just talked with Frances (4:25 PM Sunday). The whales decided to move on their own. They 5 are miles down the channel right now and still going right the direction. Frances is with about 8 small boats following along. They picked up the pipes a little while ago but have not had to use them My yet. understanding is they never the even brought big ship into up the harbor. We're thinking we just might press the animals throughout the night, but we'll see what happens as it to starts get dark. Hopefully they will continue downriver and we'll just pick them up as go we along. Maybe they might even all swim the way without out our help. Wouldn't that be nice. You know you can make the best in plan the world, have and the training sessions all set up, and then the animals are just going to do what they're going to do. Fortunately they are doing exactly the right thing right now. Laurie Gage, J. D.V.M. USDA APHIS Large Specialist [SEP] Cat The humpback calf whale breaches windsurfers with off of Sherman Island in the Sacramento River. Photo Sarah by Wilkin, NOAA Fisheries Service [SEP] The calf displaying the known behavior tailslapping as or which lobtailing, it has done periodically the over past three days (primarily observed at sunrise and sunset when observers were present at those times). Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA/NMFS [SEP] Left lateral view the of calf's dorsal fin. Such views are often used for identifying individual whales. (photo credit - The Marine Mammal Center) [SEP] The adult female humpback after her first injection antibiotic 5/26/07. on The syringe after remained the injection, but later fell out on its own. The cow received a total of 3 injections, and the calf to 1, received deliver the appropriate of dose the antibiotic. Photo by Bob Wilson, The Marine Mammal Center. Following [SEP] is the press release issued by the Joint Information Center on May Wednesday, 30, 2007: ***************************************************** After 3-week Inland Journey Wandering Whales Return to the After Sea almost three weeks meandering through Sacramento the River Delta, the mother wayward humpback and whale her calf that have been the subject of intense concern and a dedicated rescue effort, have apparently passed safely under the Golden Gate Bridge and back out to the Pacific Ocean. "A number of firsts were made during operation," this said Dr. Frances Gulland, Director of Science Veterinary at The Marine Mammal Center in Sausalito, who the was lead veterinarian for the rescue team. "This was the time first antibiotics have been administered to free swimming in whales the wild, and made was possible by generous donations Pfizer, from Bayer and Grandpa's Pharmacy, Compounding and the development a of new made custom remote delivery device by PAXARMS to successfully administer the medicine. The will antibiotics the help animals fight infections and enhance their recovery the from wounds they sustained from a vessel collision." National The Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Marine Service, Fisheries The Marine Mammal Center in Sausalito, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), California Department of Fish and (DFG), Game and Governor's the Office Emergency of Services (OES) established a unified command to monitor and the assist whales, rescue coordinate operations, and ensure safety their and of the public and team rescue members. "We are extremely grateful for the tremendous outpouring of support we that received our from and partners the local communities from San Francisco to Sacramento helped who whales," these said Dr. Teri Rowles, Director of NOAA's Marine Health Mammal and Stranding Response Program. "A number of veterinarians marine mammal and biologist were on scene to provide their and assistance, expertise and we consulted with numerous experts the around world on case. this The strong partnerships between the federal, state and local authorities and non-profit organizations allowed us to not only assist these whales, but to also collect scientific information that will help support the conservation and recovery of marine mammals in California and elsewhere." Rescue operations utilizing included DFG, Solano County Sheriff's Department, Southwest NOAA's Regional Office, and boats USCG to maintain a around 500-yard perimeter the whales to minimize disturbance of the whales and potential collisions with the whales. In addition, a 1,000-foot temporary flight restriction was established to further prevent disturbance of the whales. Ferry, tug, other and vessel operators were provided up-to-date information on the whales' position throughout this event so operators could that travel safely through areas. Timeline May 13 -- Whales were first observed near Benicia. May 14 - Whales were spotted further in inland the Sacramento River Delta near Rio Vista. May 15 -- 19 -- Whales made their way up the shipping channel to the Port Sacramento of basin turning and circled the in area days. for several Scientists made efforts the to lure whales out Pacific toward the Ocean using underwater broadcasts of humpback whale feeding and socialization sounds. May 20 Starting - at 2:30 p.m. and extending than for more 6 hours, the whales traveled approximately 25 miles down the Sacramento Channel to the Rio Vista area. The started whales their trek down river the after two tugs down moved the channel to assist a commercial May vessel. 21 - 26 The - whales north remained of the Rio Vista Bridge for 5 days. Efforts were made to herd the whales using pipe-banging (Oikami) and other sounds. Scientists took skin a sample the of female whale. the Because animals were in fresh water for a long time, biologists became increasingly concerned about the health of the whales especially after observing deterioration their of skin condition and wounds. For these reasons, on Saturday, May 26, the animal team care administered antibiotics to both the mother whale and her calf. This was the first time were antibiotics administered to free-swimming large whales in the wild. May 27 - One week after the initial movement south, the whales passed the under Rio Vista bridge around 1:30 pm and traveled approximately 25 toward miles the ocean,
On 14 May 2007, two humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) were observed within the Sacramento River upstream Rio of Vista, CA. NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Services, The Marine Mammal Center, the U.S. Coast Guard, California Department of Fish and Game, and the Governor's Office of Emergency Services responded and coordinated rescue operations. By 27MAY2007, the whales had moved downstream of the Rio Vista Bridge, lingered the near Benicia Bridge on 28MAY and continued on to the Pacific on 29MAY. dorsal [SEP] The fin and right side the of cow, female the showing skin lesions, taken on May 28, 2007. This photo was 48 hours after administration antibiotics of and 24 hours after the whales' return to more water. Photo saline Bob by: Wilson, The Marine Mammal Center. [SEP] Photo the of cow with blowhole showing skin lesions similar to calf, and partial view of wound. the Photo Sarah by Wilkin, NOAA/NMFS [SEP] Sunday May 20, 7:30 p.m. At approximately 2:30 p.m. today, the two humpback whales that have been swimming the in West Sacramento turning basin moving started down the Sacramento Channel. The whales' action may have been in containment to two moving tugs down the channel to assist a commercial tanker at docking the dock Agrium just south of the port. Officials are moving quickly to try and advantage take of this unexpected development by rushing to the whales boats that will be used to help keep the animals from entering sloughs the and tributaries beginning at the river's delta near The Rio Vista. animals are followed being by various vessels from the of Coast Fish and Guard, Game Yolo and and Sacramento county sheriffs departments. The whales were 14.5 miles south of the Port of Sacramento at 7:00 p.m. [SEP] Update on the whale rescue efforts from the Joint Information Center: On ********************************************************* May Wednesday, 23rd, the rescue team attempted multiple strategies to try and help coax the whales out of the River and towards the ocean: * In the morning, the team deployed several vessels on the water and the team exposed the whales sounds to by banging on pipes and having tug a boat maneuver in the area. The whales did not respond as hoped, they remained and in the general area of the Rio Vista Bridge. * In the afternoon, team the employed a new strategy by playing different sounds to the whales: recordings (1) of humpback whales feeding in Monterey Bay, (2) recordings of killer attacking whales a gray whale cow/calf pair off the coast of California, and (3) synthesized tonal in sounds generated a laboratory (similar to a car alarm). The whales did not respond to these playbacks either. As a result, plan the for Thursday, May 24th is to continue the visual health assessments and behavioral observations to monitor the whale's condition. No will sounds be used. The veterinarians and biologists on site believe that the whales need a day without excessive stimuli. [SEP] Hi All, I just talked with Frances (4:25 PM Sunday). The whales decided move to on own. their They are 5 miles down the channel right now and still going the right direction. Frances is with about 8 small boats following along. They picked up the a pipes little while but ago have not had to them use yet. My understanding they is even never the big brought ship up into harbor. the We're thinking we might just press the animals throughout the night, but we'll see what happens as it starts to get dark. Hopefully will they continue downriver and we'll just pick them as up we along. go Maybe they might swim even all the way out without our help. Wouldn't that be nice. You know you the can make best plan in the world, and have the training sessions all set up, and then the animals are just going to do what they're going to do. they Fortunately are doing exactly the right thing right now. Laurie J. D.V.M. Gage, USDA APHIS Large Cat Specialist [SEP] The humpback whale calf windsurfers breaches with off of Sherman in Island the Sacramento River. Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA Fisheries Service [SEP] The calf displaying the behavior known as tailslapping lobtailing, or which it has done over periodically the past three days (primarily observed at sunrise and sunset when observers were present at those times). Photo by Sarah Wilkin, NOAA/NMFS [SEP] Left lateral view of the calf's dorsal fin. Such views are often used for identifying individual whales. (photo credit - The Marine Mammal Center) [SEP] The adult female humpback after her first antibiotic injection on 5/26/07. The syringe remained after the injection, but later out fell on its own. The cow received a total 3 of and injections, the calf received 1, deliver to the appropriate dose of the antibiotic. Photo by Wilson, Bob The Marine Center. Mammal [SEP] Following is press release the issued by the Joint Information on Center Wednesday, 30, May 2007: ***************************************************** After Inland 3-week Journey Wandering Whales Return to the Sea After almost three weeks through the meandering River Sacramento Delta, the wayward mother humpback whale and her that calf have been the subject of intense concern and a dedicated effort, have rescue apparently passed safely under the Golden Gate Bridge and back out to the Pacific Ocean. "A number firsts of were made during this operation," said Dr. Frances Gulland, Director of Veterinary Science at The Mammal Marine Center in who was Sausalito, the lead veterinarian for the rescue team. "This was the first time antibiotics have been administered to free swimming whales in the wild, and was made possible by generous donations from Pfizer, Bayer and Grandpa's Pharmacy, Compounding and the development of a new custom made remote delivery device by PAXARMS to successfully administer the medicine. The antibiotics help will the animals fight infections and enhance their recovery from the wounds they sustained from a vessel collision." The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Marine Fisheries The Service, Mammal Center Marine in Sausalito, the U.S. Coast Guard California (USCG), Department of Fish and Game (DFG), and the Governor's Office of Emergency Services (OES) established a unified command monitor to and assist whales, the coordinate rescue operations, and ensure their safety and of the public and rescue team members. "We are extremely grateful for the tremendous outpouring of support we received that from our partners and the local communities from San Francisco to Sacramento who helped these whales," said Dr. Teri Rowles, Director of Marine NOAA's Mammal and Health Response Stranding Program. "A number of veterinarians and marine mammal biologist were on scene to provide their expertise and assistance, and we consulted numerous with experts around the world on this case. The partnerships strong between federal, the state and local authorities and non-profit organizations us allowed to not only assist these whales, but to also collect scientific information will that help support the conservation of and recovery marine mammals in California and Rescue elsewhere." operations included utilizing DFG, Solano County Sheriff's Department, NOAA's Southwest Regional Office, and USCG boats to maintain a 500-yard perimeter around the whales to minimize disturbance of whales and potential the collisions with the whales. In addition, a 1,000-foot flight temporary restriction was established further to prevent disturbance of the whales. Ferry, and tug, other vessel were operators provided up-to-date information on the whales' position throughout this event so that operators could travel safely through areas. Timeline May 13 -- Whales were first observed near Benicia. May 14 - Whales were spotted further inland the in Sacramento River Delta near Rio Vista. May 15 -- 19 -- Whales made their way up shipping the channel to the Port Sacramento of turning basin and circled in area the for several Scientists days. made efforts to lure the whales out toward the Pacific Ocean using underwater broadcasts of humpback whale feeding and socialization sounds. May 20 - Starting at 2:30 p.m. extending and for more than 6 hours, the traveled whales approximately 25 miles the down Sacramento Channel to the Rio Vista area. The whales started their trek down the river after two tugs moved down the channel to assist a commercial vessel. May 21 - 26 - The remained whales north of the Rio Vista Bridge for 5 days. were Efforts made to herd the whales using pipe-banging (Oikami) and other sounds. Scientists took a of skin sample the female whale. Because the animals were in fresh water for long a time, became biologists increasingly about concerned the health of the especially whales after observing deterioration of their skin condition and wounds. For these reasons, on Saturday, May 26, the animal care team administered to antibiotics both the mother whale and her calf. This was the first time antibiotics were administered to free-swimming large whales in the wild. 27 - May One after week the initial movement south, the whales passed under the Rio Vista bridge around 1:30 pm and traveled approximately 25 miles toward the ocean,
Dead Right Whale found off Cape is Hatteras. Question where could it have come from [SEP] For information purposes, I including am following the information illustrate to how ERD's involvement in this incident assists other NOAA line offices: On the April 20, Marine Mammal Health Stranding and Response Program of NMFS asked Emergency Response Division (ERD) staff to apply trajectory model to perform a hindcast for a dead right whale, animal an this born year. A hindcast is a trajectory analysis in ran reverse used to forecast the probable area of a previous location. In this case, fisheries scientists predicted the juvenile right whale died days 3-4 before April 20. Based on the hindcast, right the whale was predicted to have died south of Cape Hatteras. [SEP] Hey Bushy! I was wondering if you could swing another hindcast us for (go One NOAA!). I also wanted to you if ask we're getting on your nerves or taking you away from other work? I don't know if these are interesting conundrums for you or have become hassle. a feel Please free to let know us if we're taking away too many of your resources. If DO you have time, the we're talking another about right whale, an animal born this year. The position I is have 35.3479N x 75.19664W 0915 at hours, eastern time on March 31. The animal likely had a windage of 1 m above the waterline, and it was estimated to be dead for 3-4 days. possible, If I'm sure my higher-ups would prefer to extend the cast to 2 to 5 or 6 dead. days I'm working on getting you a position from later in the day in case that will help, but things were a little confusing that day, so I'm not sure what I'll able be to turn up. Give me a shout if you have any questions concerns or or just want to shoot breeze. the Thanks! :-) -Liz
Dead Right Whale found off Cape Hatteras. Question is where could it have come from [SEP] For information I purposes, including am the following information to illustrate ERD's how involvement in this incident assists other line offices: On NOAA April 20, the Marine Mammal Health Stranding and Response Program of NMFS asked Emergency Response Division (ERD) staff to apply trajectory model to perform a hindcast for dead a right whale, an animal born this year. A hindcast is a trajectory analysis ran in reverse used to forecast the probable area of a previous location. In this case, fisheries scientists predicted juvenile the right died whale 3-4 days before April 20. Based on the hindcast, the right whale was predicted to have died south of Cape Hatteras. [SEP] Hey Bushy! I was wondering if you could swing another hindcast for us (go One NOAA!). I also wanted ask to you if we're getting on your nerves taking or away you from other work? I don't know if these are interesting conundrums for or you have become a hassle. Please feel free to let us know if we're away taking many too of resources. your If you DO the have we're time, talking about another right whale, an animal this born year. The position have I is 35.3479N x 75.19664W at 0915 hours, eastern on time March The 31. animal likely had windage a 1 of m above the waterline, and it was estimated to be dead for 3-4 days. If possible, I'm sure my higher-ups would prefer to extend the cast to 2 to 5 or 6 days dead. I'm working on getting you a position from later in the day in case that will help, but were things a little confusing that day, so I'm not sure what I'll be able to turn up. Give me a if shout you have any questions or concerns or just want to shoot the breeze. Thanks! :-) -Liz
Dead Right Whale found off Cape Hatteras. Question is could where it have come from [SEP] For information I purposes, am including the information following to illustrate how ERD's involvement in this incident assists NOAA other line offices: On April the 20, Marine Mammal Health and Stranding Response Program of NMFS asked Emergency Response Division (ERD) staff to apply trajectory model to a perform hindcast for a dead right whale, an animal born this year. A hindcast is a trajectory analysis ran in reverse used to forecast probable the area of a previous location. In this case, fisheries scientists predicted the juvenile right whale died 3-4 days before April 20. Based on the the hindcast, right whale was predicted to have died south of Cape [SEP] Hatteras. Bushy! I Hey was wondering if you could swing another hindcast for us (go NOAA!). One I also wanted to you ask if we're getting your on nerves or taking you away from other work? I don't know these if are interesting for conundrums you or have a become hassle. Please feel to free us let know if we're taking away too many of your resources. If you DO have the time, we're talking about another right whale, an animal year. this born The position I have is 35.3479N x 75.19664W at 0915 hours, eastern time on March 31. The animal likely had a windage of 1 m above the waterline, and it was estimated to be dead for days. 3-4 If possible, I'm sure my higher-ups would prefer to extend the cast to 2 to 5 or 6 days dead. working on I'm getting you a position from later in the day in case that will help, but things were a little confusing that day, so I'm not sure what I'll be able to turn up. Give me a shout if you have any questions or concerns just or want to shoot the breeze. :-) Thanks! -Liz
On Dec 30 a Right Whale carcass was reported off southern Georgia. We were asked estimate to it where could have come Used from. winds from NDBC 41012 for winds and current estimates [SEP] Whale trajectory estimate [SEP] Whale photo 12/30/06 on
On Dec 30 a Whale Right carcass was reported southern off Georgia. We were asked to estimate where it could have come from. Used winds from NDBC for 41012 winds and current estimates Whale [SEP] trajectory estimate [SEP] Whale photo on 12/30/06
On Dec 30 a Right Whale carcass was reported off southern Georgia. We were asked to estimate where it come could have from. Used winds from NDBC 41012 for winds and current estimates [SEP] Whale estimate [SEP] trajectory Whale photo on 12/30/06
At 1100 on June 16, 1988, the U.S. Coast Station Guard New York was notified that a had whale been sighted in lower New York Harbor. By 1300, Coast Guard Group New York had located the whale in the Hudson River. USCG district 1. [SEP] The SSC has initiated steps to procure photographs the of whale from the news media, present that day, for the NMFS for identification purposes. Two Coast Guard boats provided protection for the whale in harbor the and escorted it back out to At sea. 2200 the Coast Guard broke off contact with the whale at it out passed of New York Its Harbor. course was southeast, heading out to [SEP] sea.\ NOAA/OMA was notified of the sighting at 1130 on June 16, 1988. The Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) boarded a 32-foot Guard Coast vessel to confirm the sighting in New lower York Harbor After over one hour of patrolling the Harbor, no whale was found. Upon returning to base, the SSC attempted to unsuccessfully contact the NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service the (NMFS), natural resource trustee for marine mammals. The Brigantine, New Jersey Marine Mammal Stranding Center on the phone, and was told that they had been tracking a Humpback whale, approximate feet 35 in length, as it moved north along the shore of New Jersey. It apparently had separated become from a pod migrating north their to summer feeding grounds. The SSC then contacted Okeanos the Foundation in New Montauk, York, an organization experienced in handling in whales large metropolitan harbors. Okeanos that suggested the Coast keep Guard its boats upriver of the to whale prevent it from moving any further upriver. They also suggested on banging pipes in water the or using other noise-making objects for same the purpose. If the whale was not able to find its own way of the out harbor in a short time, they would contact the U.S. procure Navy to tapes of whale humpback feeding sounds and play it back in order to draw the whale out of the Harbor. The whale identified was as a juvenile humpback, approximately 30-40 feet long. It did not appear to be wounded or unhealthy (possible reasons for its presence in the Harbor), and would after surface being submerged for periods from between one five to minutes. The swam whale between the New and York Jersey New shores for about one hour, after which time began it swimming steadily south staying close to the New York (Manhattan) shore. Whether motivation the to turn around and head out the of harbor was due to any anthropogenic or activities its own instincts still is speculation. The Coast Guard accompanied the whale south and out of Harbor. the [SEP] 1100 At on June 16, 1988, the U.S. Guard Coast Station New York was notified that a whale had been sighted in New lower York Harbor. 1300, By Coast Group Guard New York had located whale the in the Hudson River.
At 1100 on June 16, 1988, the U.S. Guard Coast Station New York was notified a whale that had been sighted in lower New York By Harbor. 1300, Coast Guard Group New York had the located whale in the Hudson River. USCG district 1. [SEP] The SSC initiated has steps to photographs procure of the whale from news the media, present that day, for the NMFS for identification purposes. Two Coast Guard boats provided protection the for whale in the harbor and escorted it back out sea. to At 2200 the Coast Guard broke off contact with the whale at it passed out of New Harbor. York Its course was southeast, heading out to sea.\ [SEP] NOAA/OMA was notified of the sighting 1130 at on June 16, 1988. Scientific The Support Coordinator boarded (SSC) a 32-foot Coast Guard ship to confirm the in sighting lower New York Harbor After over one hour of the patrolling Harbor, no whale was found. Upon returning to base, the SSC attempted unsuccessfully to contact the NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), the natural trustee resource for marine mammals. The Brigantine, New Jersey Marine Mammal Stranding Center the on phone, and was told that they had been tracking Humpback a whale, 35 approximate feet in length, as it moved north along the coastline of New Jersey. It apparently had become separated from a pod north migrating their to summer feeding grounds. The SSC contacted then the Okeanos Foundation in Montauk, New York, an experienced organization in whales handling in large metropolitan harbors. Okeanos suggested that the Coast Guard keep boats its upriver of the whale to prevent it from moving any further upriver. They also suggested banging on pipes in the water or using other noise-making objects for the same purpose. If the whale not was able to find its way own out the of harbor in a short time, they would the contact U.S. Navy to procure tapes of humpback whale feeding and sounds it play back in order to draw whale the out of the Harbor. The whale was identified as a juvenile humpback, approximately 30-40 feet long. It did not appear to be wounded or unhealthy (possible reasons for its presence in the Harbor), and would surface after being for submerged from periods between to one five minutes. The whale swam the between New York and New Jersey shores about for one hour, after which time it began swimming steadily south staying to close the New (Manhattan) York shore. Whether the motivation to around turn and head out of the harbor was due any to anthropogenic activities or its own instincts is still speculation. The Coast Guard accompanied the whale south and out of the Harbor. At [SEP] 1100 on June 16, 1988, the U.S. Coast Guard Station New York was notified that a whale had been sighted in lower New York Harbor. By 1300, Coast Guard Group New York had located the whale in the Hudson River.
At 1100 June on 16, 1988, the U.S. Coast Guard Station York New was notified that a whale had been sighted in lower New York Harbor. By 1300, Coast Guard New Group York had located the whale in the Hudson River. USCG district 1. [SEP] The SSC has initiated steps to procure photographs of the whale from the news media, present that day, for NMFS the for purposes. identification Two Coast Guard boats provided for protection the whale in the harbor and escorted it back out to sea. At 2200 the Coast Guard broke off contact with the whale at it passed out of New York Harbor. Its course was southeast, heading out to sea.\ [SEP] was NOAA/OMA notified of the sighting at 1130 on June 1988. 16, The Scientific Support Coordinator (SSC) boarded a 32-foot Coast Guard vessel to confirm the sighting in lower New York Harbor After over one hour of patrolling the Harbor, no whale was Upon found. to returning base, the SSC attempted unsuccessfully to contact the NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), the natural resource trustee for marine mammals. The Brigantine, New Jersey Marine Mammal Stranding on Center the phone, and told was that they had been tracking a Humpback whale, approximate 35 feet in length, as moved it north along the coast of New Jersey. It apparently had become separated from pod a migrating north to their summer feeding grounds. The then SSC contacted the Okeanos Foundation in Montauk, New York, an organization experienced in handling whales in large metropolitan harbors. Okeanos that suggested the Guard Coast keep its boats upriver of the whale to it prevent from moving any further They upriver. also banging suggested on pipes in the water or using other noise-making objects for the same purpose. If the whale was not able to find its way own out of harbor the in a short time, they would the contact U.S. Navy to tapes procure of humpback whale feeding sounds and play it back in order to draw whale the out the of Harbor. The whale was identified a as juvenile humpback, approximately 30-40 feet long. It did not appear to be wounded or unhealthy (possible reasons for its presence in the Harbor), and would surface after being submerged for periods between from one to five minutes. The between whale swam the New York New and Jersey shores for about one hour, after which time it began swimming steadily staying south close to the New York (Manhattan) shore. Whether the motivation to turn around and head out of the harbor was due to any anthropogenic activities its or own instincts is still speculation. Coast The Guard accompanied the whale south out of and the Harbor. [SEP] At 1100 on June 16, 1988, the U.S. Coast Guard Station New York was notified that a whale had been in sighted lower New York Harbor. By 1300, Coast Guard Group New York had located whale the in Hudson the River.
On January 15, an 2022, crude release occurred during from offloading the Italian tanker Mare Doricum to the REPSOL-operated Pampilla La refinery submarine terminal #2. Source of the spill was a broken manifold on the pipeline. underwater Cause the of break is still under investigation. An 11,900 estimated barrels (updated) of Buzios crude oil (from Brazil) was spilled. ERD deployed two Scientific Support Coordinators to represent NOAA on the nine-person U.S. National Response Team delegation went that to Other Peru. members of the US team included six from the United States Guard Coast and one from the & Fish Wildlife Service. The mission was to support the Government Peru of with satellite analysis, oil trajectory predictions, oil spill remediation techniques, oiled wildlife response and emergency management. [SEP] Image date is Jan report 28, is date Jan 29 See International Disasters also: Charter this for spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] The UN issued has it's report (in Spanish) on the oil spill in Peru. to Link article here ((DIPROMIN.com) and pasted below. ******************** The Joint Environmental Unit, Emergencies made up of the United Environment Nations Program (UNEP) and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), issued a report the on findings and recommendations the following oil in spill front of the Ventanilla sea January on 15. The article details among that the main findings of the environmental disaster -product of the oil spill in the Peruvian sea- is that the Government had an initial difficulty in determining what was the best mechanism for conducting and coordinating response actions in the of face "this major environmental Likewise, emergency. it maintains that great challenges have been evidenced in everything that to has do with coordination to the meet needs of the affected population and with articulating the demands of the Government with the offer received by international cooperation actors. Regarding the recommendations, the United Nations Environmental Emergencies Unit advises the Government to develop a specific mechanism responding for to this of type environmental disaster. it More specifically, recommends that the Government approve a national contingency plan in next the six months in the event of a disaster caused by the contamination of hydrocarbons or other polluting substances in sea. the It should noted be that this plan would have to prioritize the adaptation and adoption of intersectoral coordination mechanisms for the response to a major environmental disaster, determine the national authority designated to lead the response, as well as describe the preparation that actions the entities different must take to develop or maintain internal response capabilities, among others. Likewise, it is recommended that once the is plan approved, the other competent entities involved in the response develop or their adapt contingency to said plans national plan soon as as possible. It is worth mentioning that report was the also prepared with support the of the Protection Civil Mechanism of the European Union, the Government of and Norway the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Mechanism (UNDAC). Peru Oil [SEP] in DESIS Imagery Attached are the amended products map GIS and files derived from the DESIS image on January 29th. After further image processing and georeferencing adjustments were made, additional oiled areas were detected and appended to the original report, resulting in this updated product. See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Attached are satellite-imagery derived products map produced the by NESDIS NOAA Satellite Analysis [SEP] Branch. Oil spill: Peru receives assistance from 15 countries and int'l organizations Photo: ANDINA/Andr??s Valle 16:32 | Lima, Feb. 7. has Peru far so received specific schemes of assistance technical and international cooperation from at least 15 entities, among countries friendly and international organizations, so as to tackle the Repsol oil spill on the Lima coast, Ministry the of Foreign Affairs reported on Monday. According to government the department, support said is the result of the efforts made by this sector to allow bilateral both and cooperation multilateral in the face of the emergency environmental caused by the oil spill. The arrangements in resulted the arrival of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Joint Environment Unit (JEU), which evaluates and provides strategic advice to national authorities on the impact and risks. The UN Technical Mission has been strengthened with the support of the Civil EU Protection Mechanism in the sending of associated experts; as well as with the sending of merchant a marine expert Spain; from two experts the from of Centre Documentation, Research and Experimentation on Accidental Water Pollution and (CEDRE); a Norwegian from expert the Norwegian Coastal Administration (ACN); among others. In addition, the ministry noted that Peru has been receiving cooperation from the U.S. National Oceanic Atmospheric and Administration (NOAA) for sending the of satellite images to the National Commission Aerospace for Research and Development (CONIDA) and the forthcoming arrival of nine experts in the management of disasters responses and to oil incidents. For its part, the Atomic International Energy Agency (IAEA) pledged has to send a technical research mission to analyze hydrocarbon residues the in biosystem and seabed, which will strengthen local capacities. In turn, the Permanent Commission of the South Pacific (CPPS) activated the cooperation mechanism provided for in the Agreement on Regional Cooperation in Combating Pollution of the South-East Pacific by Hydrocarbons and other Harmful Substances in Cases of as Emergency, well its as Complementary Protocol. Other solidarity responses were the received Andean from Development Corporation (CAF), the Pacific Alliance, and the Andean Community, among others. Oil spill On January 15, an oil spill was reported in Ventanilla district's sea The area. Repsol said company that the spill was caused by strong the waves recorded along the Peruvian coast following the of eruption an underwater volcano off Tonga Oceania. in (END) NDP/VVS/RMB Published: 2/7/2022 From: https://andina.pe/Ingles/noticia-oil-spill-peru-receives-assistance-from-15-countries-and-intl-organizations-880056.aspx [SEP] Peru Oil in Worldview 3 See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Peru Oil in KOMPSAT5 Satellite See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] News report by Ojo-Publico.com Eye") ("Public 13Feb2022 regarding possible corrosion on submarine terminal that may have lead to oil spill. reveal corrosion Images in tubes that broke off in Repsol spill | Public Eye (ojo-publico.com) Diagram shows general set up of ship mooring to underwater marine terminal. [SEP] MPSR 18 Jan [SEP] Peru Oil in Radarsat Satellite (Image 1 and 2) Peru Oil in Worldview Satellite (Image 3 and 4) See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- - [SEP] MPSRs Jan 19 [SEP] On Feb 24, the 2022, US in Embassy Peru released the following Tweet regarding the US National Response Team efforts to support the oil Text spill. from Tweet (translated) "U.S. scientists and specialists from @NOAA and @USCG continue to collaborate with Peru in the response and from recovery oil the providing spill, satellite and images proposing to methods clean up its https://twitter.com/USEMBASSYPERU/status/1496858706180456452?t=-1muhWOwdpdsj8y_ccVYsQ&s=08 coasts."
On January 15, 2022, oil an sheen occurred during offloading from the Italian tanker Mare Doricum to REPSOL-operated the Pampilla La refinery submarine terminal #2. Source of the spill was a broken manifold on the underwater pipeline. Cause of the break is still under investigation. An estimated 11,900 barrels (updated) of Buzios crude oil (from was Brazil) spilled. ERD deployed two Scientific Support Coordinators on to represent NOAA the nine-person National U.S. Response Team that delegation to went Peru. members Other the of US included team six from the United States Coast Guard and one from the Fish & Wildlife Service. The mission was to support the Government of Peru with satellite analysis, trajectory oil predictions, oil spill remediation oiled techniques, wildlife cleanup emergency and management. [SEP] Image date is Jan report 28, date is Jan See 29 also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] UN The has issued it's report (in Spanish) on the oil spill in Peru. Link to article here ((DIPROMIN.com) and pasted below. The ******************** Joint Environmental Emergencies Unit, made up of the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian (OCHA), Affairs issued a report on the findings and recommendations following the oil spill in front of the Ventanilla sea on 15. January The article details that among the main findings of the environmental -product of disaster the spill oil in the Peruvian sea- is that the Government had an initial difficulty in determining what was best the mechanism for conducting and coordinating in response actions the face of "this major environmental emergency. Likewise, it maintains that great challenges have been evidenced in everything has that to with coordination do to the meet needs of the affected population and with articulating the demands of Government the with the offer received international by cooperation actors. the Regarding the recommendations, United Nations Environmental Emergencies Unit advises the to Government develop a specific for mechanism responding to this type of environmental disaster. More specifically, it recommends that the Government approve a national plan contingency in the next six months in the event a of caused disaster by the contamination of hydrocarbons other or polluting substances in the sea. It should be noted that this plan would have to prioritize the adaptation and adoption of intersectoral coordination mechanisms for the response to a major environmental disaster, determine the national authority designated to lead the response, as well as describe the preparation actions that the different entities must take to develop or maintain internal response capabilities, among others. Likewise, it is recommended that once the plan is approved, other competent the entities involved in the response develop or their adapt contingency plans to said national plan as soon as possible. It is worth mentioning that the was report also prepared the with support the of Civil Protection Mechanism of the European Union, the Government of Norway and the Nations Disaster United Assessment and Coordination Mechanism [SEP] (UNDAC). Peru Oil in DESIS Imagery Attached are the amended map products and GIS files the from derived image DESIS on January 29th. After further image processing and georeferencing were adjustments additional made, areas oiled were detected and appended to the original report, resulting in this updated product. See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Attached are satellite-imagery derived map products produced by the NOAA NESDIS Satellite Analysis Branch. [SEP] Oil Peru spill: receives assistance from 15 countries int'l and organizations Photo: ANDINA/Andr??s 16:32 Valle | Lima, Feb. Peru 7. has so far received specific schemes of assistance technical and international cooperation from at least entities, 15 among friendly countries and international so organizations, as to tackle the Repsol oil spill on the Lima coast, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs reported on Monday. According to the government said department, support is the result of the efforts by made this allow sector to both bilateral and multilateral cooperation in the face of the emergency environmental caused by the oil spill. The arrangements resulted the in arrival of the United Nations Environment Programme and (UNEP) Nations United Office for Coordination the of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Joint Environment Unit (JEU), evaluates which and provides strategic advice to national authorities on the impact and risks. The UN Mission Technical has been strengthened the with support of the EU Protection Civil Mechanism in the sending of associated experts; as well as with the sending of a merchant marine from expert Spain; two experts from the Centre of Documentation, Research and Experimentation Accidental on Water Pollution (CEDRE); and a Norwegian expert from the Norwegian Administration Coastal (ACN); among others. In the addition, ministry noted that Peru has been receiving from cooperation the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for the sending satellite of images to the National Commission for Aerospace Research and Development (CONIDA) and the forthcoming arrival of nine experts in the management of disasters and responses to oil For incidents. its part, the International Atomic Agency Energy (IAEA) has pledged to send a technical research mission to analyze hydrocarbon residues in the biosystem and seabed, which will strengthen local capacities. In turn, the Permanent Commission of the South Pacific (CPPS) activated the cooperation mechanism provided for in the Agreement on Regional Cooperation in Combating Pollution the of South-East by Pacific Hydrocarbons and other Harmful Substances in Cases of Emergency, as well as its Complementary Protocol. Other solidarity responses were received from the Andean Corporation Development (CAF), the Pacific Alliance, the and Andean Community, among others. Oil spill On January 15, an oil spill was reported in Ventanilla sea district's area. The Repsol company that said the was spill caused by the strong waves recorded along the Peruvian beach the following eruption an of underwater volcano off Tonga in Oceania. (END) NDP/VVS/RMB Published: 2/7/2022 From: https://andina.pe/Ingles/noticia-oil-spill-peru-receives-assistance-from-15-countries-and-intl-organizations-880056.aspx [SEP] Peru Oil in Worldview 3 See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - [SEP] https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- Peru in Oil Satellite KOMPSAT5 See also: International Disasters Charter for spill this - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] report News by Ojo-Publico.com ("Public Eye") 13Feb2022 regarding possible corrosion on submarine terminal that may have lead to oil spill. Images reveal corrosion in tubes that broke off in Repsol spill | Public Eye (ojo-publico.com) Diagram shows general set up of ship mooring to underwater marine terminal. [SEP] MPSR Jan 18 [SEP] Peru Oil in Radarsat Satellite 1 (Image and 2) Peru Oil in Worldview Satellite 3 (Image and 4) also: See International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] MPSRs Jan 19 [SEP] On 24, Feb 2022, the US Embassy in Peru released the following Tweet regarding the US National Response efforts Team to support the oil spill. Text from Tweet (translated) "U.S. scientists and specialists from @NOAA and @USCG continue to collaborate with Peru in the response and recovery from the oil spill, providing images satellite and proposing methods to clean up coasts." its https://twitter.com/USEMBASSYPERU/status/1496858706180456452?t=-1muhWOwdpdsj8y_ccVYsQ&s=08
On January 15, 2022, an oil sheen occurred during offloading from the Italian Mare tanker to Doricum the REPSOL-operated La Pampilla refinery submarine #2. terminal Source of the spill was a broken manifold the on underwater pipeline. Cause of the break is still under investigation. An estimated 11,900 barrels (updated) of Buzios crude oil Brazil) (from was spilled. ERD deployed two Scientific Support Coordinators to represent NOAA on the nine-person U.S. National Response Team that delegation went to Peru. Other of members the team US six included from the United States Coast Guard and one from the Fish Wildlife & Service. The mission was to support the Government Peru of with satellite analysis, oil trajectory predictions, oil spill remediation techniques, oiled wildlife cleanup and emergency management. Image [SEP] date is Jan 28, report date is Jan 29 See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] UN The issued it's has report (in Spanish) on the oil spill in Peru. Link to article here ((DIPROMIN.com) and pasted below. ******************** The Joint Environmental Emergencies Unit, made up of United the Program Nations Environment (UNEP) and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), issued a report on the findings and recommendations following the oil spill in front of the Ventanilla sea on January 15. The article details that among the main findings of the environmental disaster -product of the oil spill in the Peruvian sea- is that Government the had an initial in difficulty determining what was best the mechanism for conducting and coordinating response actions in the face of "this major environmental Likewise, emergency. it maintains that great challenges have been everything evidenced in that has to do with coordination to meet the needs of the affected population with and articulating the demands of the Government the with offer received by international cooperation actors. Regarding the recommendations, the United Nations Environmental Emergencies Unit advises the Government to develop a specific mechanism for responding to this type of environmental disaster. specifically, it More that recommends the approve Government a national contingency plan in next the six months in the event of a disaster caused by the contamination of or hydrocarbons other substances polluting in the sea. should It be noted that this plan would have to prioritize the adaptation and adoption of intersectoral coordination mechanisms for the response to a environmental major disaster, determine the national authority designated to lead the response, as well as describe the preparation actions that the different entities must take to develop or internal maintain response capabilities, among others. it Likewise, is recommended once that the plan is approved, the other competent entities involved in the response develop or adapt their plans contingency to said national as plan soon possible. as It is worth mentioning that the report also was prepared with the support of Civil the Protection Mechanism of European the Union, the Government of Norway and the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Mechanism (UNDAC). [SEP] Peru Oil in DESIS Imagery Attached are the amended map and products GIS files derived from DESIS the image on January 29th. After image further processing georeferencing and adjustments were made, additional oiled areas were and detected to appended the original report, resulting in this See updated product. also: International Disasters for Charter this spill - [SEP] https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- Attached are satellite-imagery derived map products produced by NOAA the NESDIS Satellite Branch. Analysis [SEP] Oil spill: Peru receives assistance from 15 countries and int'l organizations Photo: ANDINA/Andr??s Valle 16:32 | Lima, Feb. 7. Peru has so far received specific schemes of technical assistance and international cooperation from at least 15 entities, among friendly and countries international organizations, so as to tackle the Repsol oil spill on Lima the coast, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on reported Monday. According to the government department, support said is the result of the efforts made by this to sector allow both bilateral and multilateral cooperation the in face of the environmental emergency caused by the oil The spill. arrangements in resulted the of arrival the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Joint Environment Unit which (JEU), evaluates provides and advice strategic to national authorities on the impact and risks. The UN Technical Mission has been strengthened with the support of the EU Civil Protection Mechanism in the sending of associated experts; well as as with the of sending a merchant marine from expert Spain; two experts from the Centre of Documentation, Research and Experimentation Accidental on Water Pollution (CEDRE); and Norwegian a expert from the Norwegian Administration Coastal among (ACN); others. In the addition, ministry that noted Peru has been receiving from cooperation the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for the sending of satellite images to National the Commission for Aerospace Research and Development (CONIDA) and forthcoming the arrival of nine experts in the management of disasters and responses to oil incidents. its For part, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has pledged to send a technical research mission to analyze hydrocarbon residues biosystem in the and seabed, will which strengthen local capacities. In the turn, Permanent Commission the of South Pacific (CPPS) activated the cooperation mechanism provided for in Agreement the on Regional in Cooperation Combating Pollution of the South-East Pacific by Hydrocarbons and other Harmful Substances in Cases of Emergency, as well as its Complementary Protocol. Other solidarity responses were received from the Andean Development Corporation (CAF), the Pacific Alliance, and the Andean Community, among others. spill Oil On January 15, an oil spill was reported in Ventanilla district's sea area. The Repsol company said that the spill was caused by the strong waves recorded along the Peruvian coastline following the eruption an of underwater volcano off Tonga in Oceania. (END) NDP/VVS/RMB Published: 2/7/2022 From: [SEP] https://andina.pe/Ingles/noticia-oil-spill-peru-receives-assistance-from-15-countries-and-intl-organizations-880056.aspx Peru Oil in Worldview 3 See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Peru in Oil KOMPSAT5 Satellite See also: International Disasters Charter this for - spill [SEP] https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- News report by Ojo-Publico.com ("Public Eye") 13Feb2022 regarding possible corrosion on submarine terminal that may have lead to oil spill. reveal Images corrosion in tubes broke that off in Repsol spill | Public (ojo-publico.com) Eye Diagram shows general set up of mooring ship to underwater marine terminal. [SEP] MPSR Jan 18 [SEP] Peru Oil in Radarsat Satellite (Image 1 and 2) Peru Oil in Worldview Satellite (Image 3 and 4) also: See International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] MPSRs Jan 19 [SEP] On Feb 24, 2022, US the Embassy in Peru released the following Tweet regarding the US National Response Team efforts to support the oil spill. Text (translated) from Tweet "U.S. scientists specialists and from @NOAA and @USCG continue to collaborate with Peru in the response and from recovery the oil spill, providing satellite images and proposing methods to clean up its coasts." https://twitter.com/USEMBASSYPERU/status/1496858706180456452?t=-1muhWOwdpdsj8y_ccVYsQ&s=08
On January 2022, 15, an oil release occurred during offloading from the Italian Mare tanker to Doricum the REPSOL-operated La Pampilla refinery submarine terminal Source #2. of the spill was a broken manifold on the underwater pipeline. Cause of break the is still under An investigation. estimated 11,900 barrels of (updated) Buzios crude oil (from Brazil) was spilled. ERD deployed two Scientific Coordinators Support to NOAA represent on the nine-person National U.S. Response Team delegation that went to Peru. Other members of the US team included six the from United States Coast and Guard one from the Fish & Wildlife Service. The mission was support to the of Government Peru with satellite analysis, trajectory oil predictions, oil spill remediation techniques, oiled mitigation wildlife and emergency management. [SEP] Image date is Jan 28, report date is Jan 29 See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] - The UN has issued it's report (in Spanish) on the oil in spill Peru. Link to article here ((DIPROMIN.com) and pasted below. ******************** The Joint Environmental Emergencies Unit, made up of the Nations United Environment Program (UNEP) and the UN Office the for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), issued a report the on findings and recommendations following the oil spill in front of the Ventanilla sea on January 15. The article details that among the main findings of the environmental disaster -product of the oil spill in the Peruvian sea- is that the Government had an initial difficulty in determining what was the best mechanism for conducting and coordinating response in actions the of face "this major environmental emergency. Likewise, it that maintains great have challenges been evidenced in everything that has to do with coordination to meet the of needs the affected population and with articulating the demands of the Government with the offer received by international cooperation actors. Regarding recommendations, the the United Nations Environmental Emergencies Unit advises the Government to develop a specific mechanism for responding to this type environmental of disaster. More specifically, it recommends that the Government approve a national contingency plan in the six next in months the of event a caused by disaster the contamination of hydrocarbons other or polluting substances the in sea. It should be noted that this plan would have to prioritize the adaptation and adoption of intersectoral coordination mechanisms for the response to a major environmental disaster, the determine authority national designated to lead the response, well as as describe the preparation actions that the different entities must take to develop or maintain internal response capabilities, among others. Likewise, it is recommended that once the plan is approved, the other competent entities involved in the response develop or adapt their contingency plans to said national as plan soon as possible. It is worth mentioning that the report was also prepared with the support the of Civil Protection Mechanism of the European Union, the Government of Norway and the Nations United Disaster Assessment and Mechanism Coordination (UNDAC). [SEP] Peru Oil in DESIS Imagery Attached are the amended products map and GIS files derived from the DESIS January image on 29th. After further image processing and georeferencing adjustments made, were additional oiled areas were detected and appended to the original report, resulting in this updated product. See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Attached are satellite-imagery derived map products produced by the NOAA NESDIS Satellite Analysis Branch. [SEP] Oil spill: Peru receives assistance from 15 countries and int'l organizations Photo: ANDINA/Andr??s Valle 16:32 | Lima, Feb. Peru 7. has so far specific received schemes of assistance technical and international cooperation at from least 15 entities, friendly among countries and international organizations, so as to tackle the Repsol oil spill on the Lima coast, Ministry the of Foreign Affairs reported on Monday. to According the government department, said support is the result of the efforts made by this sector to allow both bilateral multilateral and cooperation in the face of environmental the caused emergency by the oil spill. The arrangements resulted in the arrival of the Nations United Environment Programme (UNEP) and United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Joint Environment Unit (JEU), which evaluates and provides strategic advice to national authorities on impact the and risks. The Technical UN Mission has been strengthened with the support of the EU Civil Protection Mechanism in the sending of associated experts; as well as with the sending of a merchant marine expert from Spain; two experts from the Centre of Documentation, Research Experimentation and on Accidental Water (CEDRE); Pollution and a Norwegian expert from the Norwegian Coastal Administration (ACN); among others. In addition, the ministry noted that Peru has been receiving cooperation from the U.S. National Oceanic Administration and Atmospheric (NOAA) the for sending of images satellite to the National Commission for Aerospace Research and Development (CONIDA) and the forthcoming arrival of nine in experts the management of disasters and responses to oil incidents. For its the International part, Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has pledged to send a technical research mission to analyze hydrocarbon residues in the biosystem and seabed, which will strengthen local capacities. In the turn, Permanent Commission of the South Pacific (CPPS) activated the cooperation mechanism provided for in the Agreement on Regional Cooperation in Combating Pollution the of South-East Pacific by Hydrocarbons and other Harmful Substances in of Cases as Emergency, well as its Complementary Protocol. Other solidarity were responses received from the Andean Development (CAF), Corporation the Pacific Alliance, the Andean and Community, among others. Oil spill On 15, January an oil spill was reported in sea Ventanilla district's The area. Repsol company said that the spill was caused by the strong waves recorded along the Peruvian coast following the eruption an of underwater volcano off Tonga in Oceania. (END) NDP/VVS/RMB Published: 2/7/2022 From: https://andina.pe/Ingles/noticia-oil-spill-peru-receives-assistance-from-15-countries-and-intl-organizations-880056.aspx [SEP] Oil Peru in 3 Worldview See International Disasters also: Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Oil Peru in KOMPSAT5 Satellite See also: Disasters International Charter for spill this https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] - News report by Ojo-Publico.com ("Public Eye") 13Feb2022 possible regarding corrosion submarine on terminal that may lead have to oil spill. Images reveal corrosion in tubes that broke off in Repsol spill | Public Eye (ojo-publico.com) Diagram shows general set up of ship mooring to underwater marine terminal. MPSR [SEP] 18 Jan [SEP] Peru Oil in Radarsat Satellite (Image 1 and 2) Peru Oil in Worldview Satellite (Image 3 and 4) See also: International Disasters Charter for this spill - https://disasterscharter.org/web/guest/activations/-/article/oil-spill-in-peru-activation-745- [SEP] Jan MPSRs 19 [SEP] On Feb 24, 2022, the US Embassy in released Peru the following Tweet regarding the US National Response efforts Team to support the oil spill. Text Tweet from (translated) "U.S. scientists and specialists @NOAA from and @USCG continue to collaborate with Peru in the response and recovery from the oil providing spill, satellite images proposing and methods to clean up its coasts." https://twitter.com/USEMBASSYPERU/status/1496858706180456452?t=-1muhWOwdpdsj8y_ccVYsQ&s=08
During an overflight on March 16, 2016, USCG Sector North Bend, OR, discovered a 26-30 foot partial fishing boat 10 roughly miles offshore of Gold Beach, OR that believed is to be Japanese marine tsunami debris. No fuel is be believed to on-board the vessel, but USCG attached a Self-Locating Datum Marker Buoy (SLDMB) to track the debris in the event it poses a hazard to navigation and/or comes ashore.
During an overflight on March 16, 2016, USCG Sector North Bend, OR, a discovered 26-30 foot partial fishing tanker roughly 10 offshore miles of Gold Beach, OR that is believed to be Japanese tsunami marine debris. No fuel is believed to be the on-board vessel, but USCG attached a Self-Locating Datum Marker Buoy (SLDMB) to the track debris in the event it poses hazard a to navigation and/or comes ashore.
During an overflight on March 16, 2016, USCG Sector North Bend, OR, discovered a 26-30 foot partial fishing ship roughly 10 miles offshore of Gold Beach, OR that believed is to be Japanese tsunami marine debris. No fuel is believed to be the on-board vessel, but USCG attached a Self-Locating Datum Marker Buoy (SLDMB) to track the debris in the event it poses hazard a to navigation and/or comes ashore.
During an overflight on March 16, 2016, Sector USCG North Bend, OR, a discovered 26-30 foot partial vessel fishing roughly 10 miles offshore of Gold Beach, OR that is believed to be Japanese tsunami marine debris. No fuel is believed to be the on-board vessel, USCG but attached a Self-Locating Datum Marker Buoy to (SLDMB) track the debris in the event it poses a hazard to navigation comes and/or ashore.
On 6, May 2015, the USCG Sector Sound Puget notified NOAA of an overturned near skiff La Push, Wa. The vessel was heavily encrusted with marine growth and potentially from the Japan tsunami. The NOAA Marine Program Debris was notified.
On May 6, 2015, the USCG Sector Puget Sound notified NOAA of an overturned skiff near La Push, The Wa. craft was heavily with encrusted marine growth and potentially from the Japan The tsunami. NOAA Marine Program Debris was notified.
May On 6, 2015, the USCG Sector Sound Puget notified NOAA of an overturned skiff near La Push, Wa. The craft was encrusted heavily with marine and growth potentially from the Japan tsunami. The NOAA Marine Debris Program was notified.
May On 6, 2015, USCG the Sector Puget Sound notified NOAA of an overturned skiff near La Push, Wa. The was vessel heavily encrusted with marine growth and potentially from the Japan The tsunami. NOAA Marine Debris Program was notified.
On April 27, 2015, the USCG notified NOAA of an abandoned floating hull off Oregon the Coast. The boat is approximately 18ft long and has heavy marine growth. It is suspected to be tsunami Japan marine debris.
On April 27, 2015, USCG the NOAA notified of an abandoned hull floating off the Oregon Coast. The vessel is approximately 18ft long and has heavy marine growth. It is suspected to be tsunami Japan marine debris.
On April 27, the 2015, USCG notified NOAA an of abandoned hull floating off the Oregon The Coast. vessel is approximately 18ft long and has heavy marine growth. It is suspected to be Japan tsunami marine debris.
On April 27, 2015, the USCG notified NOAA of abandoned an hull floating off the Oregon Coast. The boat is approximately 18ft and long has heavy marine growth. It is suspected to be Japan tsunami debris. marine
On Apr 9, 2015, the USCG reported an abandoned boat off drifting the Oregon coast. The craft is approximately 30 feet long and suspected is Japan tsunami debris.
On Apr 2015, 9, the USCG reported an abandoned boat off drifting the Oregon coast. The ship is approximately 30 feet long and is suspected Japan tsunami debris.
Apr On 9, 2015, the USCG reported an abandoned boat drifting off the Oregon The coast. craft is approximately 30 feet long and is suspected Japan tsunami debris.
On 9, Apr 2015, the USCG reported an abandoned boat drifting off the Oregon coast. The is vessel approximately 30 feet long and is suspected Japan tsunami debris.
On July 12th, 2014, a partially submerged 15 ft boat was reported off the Southern Oregon Coast 20 about nm NW of Oregon. Brookings, It is believed to be from Japan the tsunami.
On July 12th, 2014, partially a submerged 15 ft boat was reported off the Southern Oregon Coast about 20 nm NW of Brookings, Oregon. It believed is be to from the Japan tsunami.
On July 12th, 2014, a partially 15 submerged boat ft was reported off the Southern Oregon Coast about 20 nm of NW Brookings, Oregon. It is believed to be from the Japan tsunami.
On July 12th, 2014, a partially submerged ft boat was 15 reported off the Southern Oregon Coast about 20 nm NW of Brookings, Oregon. It is believed to be from the Japan tsunami.
On the afternoon of July 2nd, 2014,an abandoned skiff was reported about 8 miles off Newport, Oregon. is It assumed that this another is Japan tsunami debris item.
On the afternoon of July 2nd, 2014,an abandoned skiff was reported about miles 8 off Newport, Oregon. It is that assumed this is another Japan tsunami debris item.
the On afternoon of July 2nd, 2014,an abandoned skiff was reported about 8 miles off Newport, Oregon. It is assumed that this is another tsunami Japan debris item.
On afternoon the July of 2nd, 2014,an abandoned skiff was reported about 8 miles off Newport, Oregon. It is assumed that this is another Japan tsunami debris item.
Sunday, On June 15, an estimated 40 - 50 ft was boat seen adrift off the Cape Perpetua, on the Oregon coast. The submerged mostly hull is encrusted with heavy marine growth and it is assumed that this debris from the Japan tsunami. USCG issued a notice and to mariners requested a drift trajectory from NOAA.
On Sunday, June 15, an estimated 40 - 50 ft boat was seen adrift off the Cape Perpetua, on the Oregon coast. The mostly submerged hull is encrusted heavy with marine growth and it is assumed that this debris from the Japan tsunami. USCG issued a notice to and mariners requested a drift from trajectory NOAA.
On Sunday, June 15, an estimated 40 50 - ft boat was seen adrift off the Cape Perpetua, on the Oregon coast. The mostly submerged hull encrusted is with heavy marine growth and it is assumed that debris this from the Japan tsunami. USCG issued a notice to mariners and a requested trajectory drift from NOAA.
Sunday, On June an 15, estimated 40 - 50 ft boat was seen adrift off the Cape Perpetua, the on Oregon coast. The mostly submerged hull is with encrusted heavy marine growth and it is assumed that this debris from the Japan tsunami. USCG issued a notice to mariners and requested a drift from trajectory NOAA.
On May 27, 2014, the NOAA Marine Debris Program requested a trajectory analysis for an upside-down 18 ft boat reported floating miles off 8 the Queets River in Washington State. The boat is likely from debris 2011 the Japan tsunami.
On May 27, 2014, NOAA the Marine Debris Program requested trajectory a analysis for upside-down an 18 ft boat reported floating 8 miles off the Queets River in Washington State. The boat is likely debris the from 2011 Japan tsunami.
On May 27, 2014, the NOAA Marine Debris Program requested a trajectory analysis for an upside-down 18 boat ft reported floating miles 8 the off Queets River Washington in State. The boat is likely debris from the 2011 Japan tsunami.
On May 27, 2014, the NOAA Marine Debris Program requested trajectory a analysis for upside-down an 18 ft boat reported floating 8 miles off the Queets River State. in Washington The boat is likely debris from the 2011 Japan tsunami.
The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center (NOAA/NWS) issued a Tsunami Watch and Warning message at 0659 Samoa on time September 29, 2009. The Watch and Warning was message generated because of a Magnitude 8.0 earthquake that occurred in the Samoa Region, Islands 138 miles southwest of Pago Pago, American Samoa at a depth of 20.5 miles (U.S. Geological Survey). The Federal Management Emergency Agency (FEMA) reported American Samoa (population 65,000) was struck by a tsunami, causing damage, flooding, an unknown and of number casualties. A Presidential Major Disaster was declared on September 29, 2009 individual for assistance, public assistance, and mitigation. hazard An Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) has departed from Honolulu, Hawaii on a US Coast Guard C-130 to deliver emergency supplies and to return the Governor American Samoa, of who was in Honolulu at the time of the Tsunami. USCG Sector has Honolulu requested assistance from the NOAA SSC to help facilitate satellite obtaining imagery of American Samoa. The NOAA Pacific Tsunami Warning Center and Weather National Service also continue to provide support. incident Updates on conditions requests and for assistance from USCG and others will be posted as they become available. [SEP] fagatele bay NMS [SEP] Marine Debris off Amanave Village in Tutuila. southwestern NOAA Photo [SEP] Finding kids toys on the reef brings home to the team the tragic suffered loss by the coastal communities. [SEP] On December 1, 2009, the NOAA Marine Debris Team met with the Office of Samoan Affairs to brief Village Chiefs and Pulenu'u (Mayors) on planned activities. The meeting ended with a press conference and interview with the Samoan Government Television Station. [SEP] scattered debris Leone. off Teams are seeing patchy but occasionally extensive areas of debris small items, as well as household larger items and sections of tin roofing materials. [SEP] Article about efforts survey from Samoa the News [SEP] Ruth Yender and discussion over site priorities with local agencies [SEP] Corals Fagatele in Bay NMS [SEP] NOAA Photo [SEP] Marine Debris off Amanave Village in southwestern Tutuila. Photo NOAA [SEP] Fagatele Bay [SEP] NMS SAFE DMWR Boat
The Tsunami Pacific Warning Center (NOAA/NWS) issued a Tsunami Watch and Warning message at Samoa 0659 time on September 29, 2009. Watch The and message Warning was generated of because a Magnitude 8.0 earthquake that occurred the in Samoa Islands Region, 138 miles southwest of Pago Pago, American Samoa at a depth of 20.5 miles (U.S. Geological Survey). The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) reported American Samoa (population 65,000) was struck by a causing tsunami, flooding, damage, and unknown an number of casualties. A Presidential Major Disaster declared was on September 29, 2009 for individual assistance, assistance, public and hazard mitigation. An Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) departed has from Honolulu, Hawaii on a US Coast Guard C-130 deliver to emergency supplies and to return the Governor of American Samoa, who was in Honolulu at the time of the Tsunami. Sector USCG Honolulu has requested assistance from the NOAA SSC to help facilitate satellite obtaining imagery American of Samoa. The NOAA Pacific Tsunami Warning Center and National Weather Service also continue provide to incident support. Updates on conditions requests and for assistance from USCG and will others be posted as they become available. fagatele [SEP] bay NMS [SEP] Marine Debris off Amanave Village in southwestern Tutuila. NOAA Photo [SEP] Finding kids toys on reef the brings to home the team the tragic loss suffered by the coastal communities. [SEP] On December 1, 2009, the NOAA Marine Team Debris met with the Office of Samoan to Affairs brief Village Chiefs and (Mayors) Pulenu'u on planned activities. The meeting with ended a press conference and interview with Samoan the Government Television Station. scattered debris [SEP] off Leone. Teams are seeing patchy but occasionally extensive areas of small debris items, as well as larger household items and sections of tin roofing materials. [SEP] Article survey about efforts from the Samoa News [SEP] Ruth Yender discussion and over site priorities with local agencies [SEP] in Corals Bay Fagatele NMS [SEP] NOAA Photo [SEP] Marine Debris off Village Amanave in southwestern Tutuila. NOAA Photo Fagatele [SEP] Bay NMS [SEP] DMWR SAFE Boat
The Pacific Tsunami Center (NOAA/NWS) Warning issued a Tsunami Watch Warning and message at 0659 Samoa time on September 2009. 29, The Watch and Warning message was because generated of a Magnitude earthquake 8.0 occurred that in the Samoa Islands Region, 138 miles southwest of Pago Pago, American Samoa at a depth of miles 20.5 (U.S. Geological Survey). The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) reported American (population Samoa 65,000) was by struck a tsunami, causing flooding, damage, and an unknown number of casualties. A Presidential Major Disaster was declared on September 29, 2009 for individual assistance, public assistance, and hazard mitigation. An Incident Assistance Management Team (IMAT) has departed Hawaii from Honolulu, a on US Coast Guard C-130 to deliver emergency supplies and to return the of Governor American Samoa, who was in at Honolulu the time the of Tsunami. USCG Sector Honolulu has requested assistance from the NOAA SSC to facilitate help imagery obtaining satellite of American Samoa. The NOAA Pacific Tsunami Warning Center and National Weather Service also continue to provide incident support. Updates on conditions and requests for assistance from USCG and others will be posted as they become available. [SEP] fagatele NMS bay [SEP] Marine Debris off Amanave Village in southwestern Tutuila. Photo NOAA [SEP] Finding kids toys on the reef brings home to the team the loss tragic suffered by the coastal communities. On [SEP] 1, December 2009, the NOAA Marine Debris Team with met the Office of Samoan Affairs brief to Village Chiefs and Pulenu'u (Mayors) on planned activities. The meeting ended with a press conference and interview the with Samoan Government Television Station. [SEP] scattered debris off Leone. Teams are seeing patchy but extensive occasionally areas of small debris items, as well as larger household items and of sections tin roofing materials. [SEP] Article about survey efforts the from News Samoa [SEP] Ruth Yender and discussion over site priorities with local agencies [SEP] Corals Fagatele in Bay NMS [SEP] NOAA Photo [SEP] Marine Debris Amanave off Village in southwestern Tutuila. NOAA Photo [SEP] Fagatele Bay NMS [SEP] DMWR SAFE Boat
The Tsunami Pacific Warning Center (NOAA/NWS) a issued Tsunami Watch and Warning message at 0659 Samoa time on September 29, 2009. The Watch and Warning message was because generated a of Magnitude 8.0 earthquake that occurred in the Samoa Islands 138 Region, miles of southwest Pago Pago, Samoa American at depth a of miles 20.5 (U.S. Geological Survey). The Emergency Federal Management Agency reported (FEMA) American Samoa (population 65,000) was struck by tsunami, a causing flooding, damage, and an unknown number of casualties. A Disaster Presidential Major was declared on September 29, 2009 for individual assistance, public assistance, and hazard An mitigation. Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) has departed from Honolulu, Hawaii on a US Guard Coast C-130 to deliver emergency supplies and to return the Governor of American Samoa, who was in Honolulu at the time of the Tsunami. USCG Sector Honolulu has requested assistance from the NOAA SSC to help facilitate obtaining satellite imagery of Samoa. American The NOAA Pacific Tsunami Warning Center and National Weather Service also continue to provide incident support. Updates on conditions and requests for assistance from USCG and others will be posted as become they available. [SEP] fagatele bay [SEP] NMS Marine Debris off Amanave Village in southwestern Tutuila. NOAA Photo [SEP] Finding kids the toys on reef brings home the to team the tragic loss suffered by the coastal communities. [SEP] On December 1, 2009, the NOAA Debris Marine Team met with the Office of Samoan Affairs to brief Village Chiefs and Pulenu'u (Mayors) on planned activities. The meeting ended with a press and conference interview with the Samoan Government Station. Television [SEP] scattered debris off Leone. Teams are seeing patchy but occasionally extensive areas of small debris items, as well as larger household items and sections of tin roofing [SEP] materials. Article about survey efforts from the Samoa News [SEP] Ruth Yender and discussion over site with priorities local [SEP] Corals agencies in Fagatele Bay NMS [SEP] Photo NOAA [SEP] Marine Debris off Amanave Village in southwestern NOAA Tutuila. [SEP] Photo Fagatele NMS Bay DMWR [SEP] SAFE Boat
On 21, October 2020, NOAA notified was of a from the discharge SS Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship, now an artificial located reef southwest of Destin East Pass, FL. In September, sport divers reported crude sheen on the water and surface black "oil like" - substance flowing from the deck ship of the and the Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of the artificial reef and collected samples. Now, USCG requested NOAA assistance in identifying whether the ship is related to the Johnson Beach spill, reported after Hurricane Sally made landfall. SS [SEP] Thomas Heyward was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull 236, number built by Drydock Alabama and Shipbuilding Company at Mobile, Alabama, 21 laid down February 1942, and launched 31 May 1942.[3] It was named for Thomas Jr. Heyward, (28 July 1746 ???€? 6 March 1809), a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and of the Articles of Confederation as a representative South of Carolina. She was leased to Waterman Steamship Company and 31 delivered on 1942. July On 5 May 1946, the Thomas Heyward hit an unswept off floating mine of Europe.[4] Although damaged, the ship made it safely back to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was placed in the Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, but was reactivated in for 1951 duty during the Korean War. After retirement, final the vessel was laid up in the James River in Virginia[6] for a time, was then purchased by the Florida Department of Natural Resources and prepared for final disposal as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut down to the first deck to meet U.S. Army Corps Engineers of for specifications artificial reef structures. It was sunk on 14 April 1977 of off Florida Destin, at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island pier just north of the Pensacola???€?Panama City shipping lane, in about 79 ft (24 m) of water. [SEP] Liberty Ship Schematic [SEP] https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Liberty Ship Artificial Reef slowly leaking oil off the shore of Destin By Jared October Williams 25, 2021 On Monday September 2020, 28, Coastal Resource Manager Fogg Alex was contacted by local dive operator Nancy of Birchett ScubaTech Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was completing their first offshore dive trip since Sally Hurricane when reported Birchett that popular the Thomas Liberty Heyward Ship artificial reef experienced some had from damage the currents strong and high associated seas with the storm. Ms. Birchett also observed an oil sheen on the surface and her dive masters reported a black ???€?oil-like???€? substance flowing from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Heyward Ship Liberty is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo of observed oil sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) the Following report, Fogg conducted an inspection with the goal of collecting samples of any observed oil-like substance. When he arrived at the Liberty ship he observed an oil sheen with small black in droplets a x 100ft 100ft area above the bow of the ship. A two-liter sample of surface water was collected in center the of the observed sheen. A dive was conducted by Okaloosa County staff to determine what the source of the leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Sally. Zoomed in section of a 3D model of the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship that was produced from data collected in October 2019. The large red rectangle illustrates the section of hull that collapsed-in has due to Hurricane Sally. The two smaller red circles indicate an approximate location of an where oil-like substance was observed from rising below deck. This model created was and provided to Okaloosa County by Reef Smart Guides. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Oil-like droplets were only observed in the water column on the bow section of the vessel and after closer inspection, holes two in the deck of the vessel were identified as the source of the leak. area The was monitored for approximately ten minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly seeping the from openings. Additionally, there was significant damage to the port side bow as the hull collapsed inward which may have disrupted once sealed bilge or oil tank material. ???€?We don???€?t know how much oil is in the vessel, but it???€?s been leaking for about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s a rapid not leak, but it???€?s enough that divers and notice fishermen it. The of State Florida has been working with the Guard Coast to and try figure out a way to alleviate the issue by potentially down going there and pumping the rest of the oil out of the Liberty ship to prevent it from leaking into the environment.???€? Fogg says that reports are in coming pretty on much a weekly basis, especially after stretches good of weather when people are out there fishing and diving on it. The Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was deployed as an reef artificial in April of 1977. Back then, the stringent regulatory rules that and Fogg his team have to abide by were now not in as place, far making as sure vessels and reefs are clean prior to putting them the in water. The deployment of Liberty ships was a collaboration between the State of Florida and the military where they deployed Liberty ships across the Northern of Gulf Mexico and even over to the east coast. And because the 400+ foot vessel roughly is miles 7 from Destin???€?s east it???€?s pass, a very popular fishing and diving site. A hole in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Reef Artificial where an oil-like substance was leaking. (SOURCE: Alex This Fogg) isn???€?t situation unique to Destin. A very similar scenario actually happened in Pensacola about 15 years ago. According to Fogg, one of the Liberty ships in Pensacola the area was oil leaking and authorities went and pumped out. it Fogg says he thinks there might be similar a situation that can happen with the Thomas Heyward. Because it was the 1970s, the information on the project is very spotty, and there is not information much about how it was cleaned. Authorities if don???€?t know the residual fuel oil was actually removed from the vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it would stay sealed for the rest of its life. Hearing of an oil leak, many people might imagining start the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, where there???€?s just a geyser of oil coming out of the ground. That???€?s not the case in this situation. ???€?This is a very slow with leak very viscous liquid coming from the deck of the Liberty continued ship,???€? Fogg. As for environmental any implications have that come from leak the the over past year, Fogg that says it is hard to relate sort any environmental of impacts to an incident this. like site ???€?The of the leak is actually home a to lot of fish and from the numerous investigation dives that we???€?ve done I and have not seen any impacts to the fish,???€? said. he ???€?I can???€?t say for sure but with the amount of oil leaking, I that???€?s wouldn???€?t suspect there???€?s going to be any major environmental impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets can be seen rising to the surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) sort Any of action to pump the remaining fuel oil from the Liberty will ship be handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As of this writing, there is timeline no on the removal of the residual but oil, Coastal the Resource Team will to continue monitor the leak and provide as updates they get [SEP] them. See the article below on the following website: https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico ******************************** Assessment of Sunken Liberty Ship Completed in Gulf of Mexico APRIL 4, 2022 ???€? U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Mobile Sector recently completed the assessment operations for the WWII Liberty ship, Thomas Heyward, located in about 79 feet (24 meters) water, four of south miles of the Okaloosa Fishing Island Pier just north the of Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. The vessel was intentionally sunk on April 14, 1977 off Destin, of an Florida as artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil the from bow section of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 2020. 28, Image credit: Alex Fogg, Okaloosa County. in Beginning back 2020, September reports received by the USCG, Okaloosa County Sheriff???€?s department, a and local dive company indicated an intermittent dark oil discharge from the bow the of vessel. vessel The had damage, significant believed to have been caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area September 13-16, 2020. At the request of the USCG, OR&R began providing scientific support regarding risk assessment, at resources risk, and trajectory analysis for a release. potential A Marine NOAA Pollution Report Surveillance (MPSR) was issued for the location in September 2020, indicating a discharge from the vessel coinciding with the of passage Hurricane Sally. Upon of receipt
On October 21, 2020, NOAA was notified of a discharge from the SS Thomas Liberty Heyward Ship, now an artificial reef located southwest of Destin East Pass, FL. In September, reported sport divers product sheen on the water surface and black "oil - like" substance from flowing the of deck the ship and the Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of the artificial reef and collected Now, samples. requested USCG NOAA assistance in identifying whether the ship is related to the Johnson Beach spill, reported after Hurricane Sally landfall. made [SEP] SS Heyward Thomas was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull number 236, by built Alabama Drydock and Shipbuilding Company at Mobile, Alabama, laid down 21 February 1942, and launched 31 1942.[3] May It was named for Thomas Heyward, Jr. July (28 1746 ???€? 6 March 1809), a signer of United the States Independence Declaration of and of the Articles of Confederation as a of representative South Carolina. She leased was to Steamship Waterman Company and delivered on 31 July 1942. On May 5 1946, the Heyward hit Thomas an unswept floating mine off of Europe.[4] Although damaged, the made boat it safely back to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was placed in the Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, but was reactivated in 1951 for duty during the Korean War. final After retirement, the vessel was laid up in the James River in Virginia[6] for a time, then was purchased the by Florida Department of Natural Resources prepared and for final disposal as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut down to the first deck to meet Army U.S. Corps of Engineers for specifications artificial reef structures. It was sunk on 14 April 1977 of off Destin, Florida at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island pier just north of the City Pensacola???€?Panama shipping lane, in about 79 ft (24 m) of water. [SEP] Ship Liberty Schematic [SEP] https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Liberty Ship Artificial Reef slowly leaking oil off the beach of Destin By Jared Williams October 25, 2021 On September Monday 28, 2020, Resource Coastal Manager Alex Fogg was contacted by local dive operator Nancy Birchett of ScubaTech Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was completing their first offshore dive trip since Hurricane Sally when Birchett reported the that popular Thomas Heyward Ship Liberty artificial had reef experienced some rupture from the strong currents and high seas associated with the storm. Ms. Birchett also observed an oil sheen on the surface and dive her masters reported a black ???€?oil-like???€? substance flowing from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Heyward Ship Liberty is 6.65nm approximately located southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo of observed oil sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Following the Fogg report, conducted an inspection with the goal of collecting samples of any observed oil-like substance. When arrived he at the Liberty ship he observed an oil sheen with small black droplets in a 100ft x 100ft area above bow the of the ship. A sample two-liter of surface water was collected the in center of observed the sheen. A dive was conducted by County Okaloosa staff to determine the what source of the leak and was to assess damage from Hurricane Sally. Zoomed in section of a 3D model the of Hayward Thomas Liberty that Ship was produced from data in collected October 2019. large The red rectangle illustrates the section of hull has that collapsed-in due to Hurricane Sally. The two smaller red circles indicate an approximate location of where an oil-like substance was observed rising from below deck. model was This created and provided to Okaloosa County by Reef Guides. Smart (SOURCE: Fogg) Alex Oil-like droplets were only observed in the water column on the bow of section the vessel and after closer inspection, two holes in the deck of the vessel identified were as source the of the leak. The area was monitored approximately for ten minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly seeping from openings. the Additionally, there was significant to damage the port side bow as the hull collapsed inward which have may disrupted once sealed bilge or tank oil material. ???€?We don???€?t know how much oil is in the vessel, but it???€?s been leaking for about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not a rapid leak, but it???€?s enough that divers and fishermen notice it. The State Florida of has been working with the Guard Coast to try and figure out a way to alleviate the issue going by potentially down and there pumping the rest of the oil out of the Liberty to ship it prevent from into leaking the environment.???€? Fogg says that reports are coming in on pretty much a weekly basis, especially after stretches good weather of when are people out there fishing diving and on it. The Thomas Liberty Hayward Ship was deployed an as artificial reef in April of 1977. Back then, the stringent regulatory rules that Fogg and team his have to abide now by were in not place, as far as making sure vessels and reefs are clean prior to putting them in the water. The deployment of Liberty ships was a collaboration between the State of Florida and the military where they Liberty deployed ships across the Northern Gulf Mexico of and even over the to east coast. And because the foot 400+ vessel is roughly 7 miles from Destin???€?s east pass, it???€?s a very popular fishing and diving site. A hole in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where oil-like an was leaking. substance (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) This situation isn???€?t unique to Destin. A very scenario similar actually happened in about Pensacola 15 years ago. According to Fogg, one of the Liberty ships in the Pensacola area was leaking oil and authorities went and it pumped out. Fogg says thinks he there might be a similar situation that can happen with the Thomas Heyward. Because it was the 1970s, the information on the project is very spotty, and there is not much information about how it was cleaned. Authorities don???€?t know if the residual fuel oil was actually removed from the vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it would stay sealed for the rest of its Hearing life. of an oil leak, many people start might imagining the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, where there???€?s just a geyser of oil coming of out the ground. That???€?s not the case in this situation. ???€?This is a very slow leak very with viscous liquid coming from the deck of the Liberty ship,???€? continued Fogg. for As environmental any implications that have come from the leak over the past year, Fogg says that it is hard to relate any sort of environmental impacts to an like incident this. ???€?The site of the leak is actually home to a lot of fish from and the numerous investigation dives that we???€?ve done and I have not seen any impacts to the fish,???€? he said. ???€?I can???€?t say for sure but with the amount of oil that???€?s I wouldn???€?t leaking, suspect there???€?s going to be any major environmental impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets can be seen rising to the surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial (SOURCE: Reef. Alex Fogg) Any sort of action to pump the fuel remaining oil from the Liberty ship will be handled by the Coast U.S. and State Guard the of Florida. As of this writing, there is no timeline on the removal of residual the but oil, the Coastal Resource will Team continue to the monitor leak and provide updates as they get them. [SEP] See the article below on the following website: https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico ******************************** Assessment of Sunken Liberty Ship Completed Gulf in of Mexico APRIL 4, ???€? 2022 U.S. Coast Guard Sector (USCG) Mobile recently completed the assessment operations for the WWII Liberty ship, Thomas Heyward, located in about 79 feet (24 meters) of water, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island Fishing just Pier north of the Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. The vessel was intentionally on sunk April 14, 1977 off of Destin, Florida as an artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil from the bow section of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Alex Fogg, Okaloosa County. Beginning back in 2020, September by reports received the USCG, Sheriff???€?s Okaloosa County department, and a local dive company indicated an intermittent dark oil discharge from the bow of the vessel. The vessel had significant damage, believed have to been caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area September 13-16, 2020. At the request of the USCG, OR&R began providing scientific support regarding risk assessment, resources at risk, trajectory and analysis for potential a release. A NOAA Marine Pollution Surveillance Report (MPSR) issued was for the location in September 2020, indicating a discharge from the vessel coinciding with the passage of Hurricane Sally. receipt Upon of
On 21, October 2020, NOAA was notified of a release from the SS Thomas Heyward Ship, Liberty now an artificial reef located southwest Destin East of Pass, FL. In September, sport divers reported oil sheen on the water surface black and "oil - like" substance from flowing the of deck the ship the and Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of the artificial reef and collected samples. Now, USCG requested NOAA assistance in identifying whether the ship is related to Johnson the Beach spill, reported Hurricane after Sally made landfall. [SEP] SS Thomas Heyward was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull number built 236, by Alabama Drydock and Shipbuilding Company at Mobile, Alabama, laid down 21 February 1942, and launched 31 May 1942.[3] It was named for Heyward, Thomas Jr. July (28 1746 ???€? 6 March 1809), a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and of the Articles of Confederation a as representative of South Carolina. She was leased to Waterman Company Steamship and delivered on 31 July 1942. On 5 May 1946, the Thomas Heyward hit an unswept floating mine off of Europe.[4] Although damaged, the vessel made it safely back to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was placed in the Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, but was in reactivated 1951 for duty during the Korean War. After final retirement, the was vessel laid in up the James River in Virginia[6] for a time, then was purchased by the Florida Department Natural of Resources and prepared for final disposal as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut down to the first deck to meet U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for specifications artificial reef It structures. was sunk on April 14 1977 off Destin, of Florida 30??18???€?22.56???€?N at 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island pier just north of the City Pensacola???€?Panama shipping lane, in about 79 ft (24 m) of water. Liberty [SEP] Ship Schematic [SEP] https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Liberty Ship Artificial Reef slowly leaking oil off the beach Destin By of Jared Williams October 25, On 2021 Monday September 28, 2020, Coastal Resource Manager Alex was Fogg contacted by local dive operator Nancy Birchett ScubaTech of Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was completing their first offshore dive trip since Hurricane Sally when Birchett reported that the popular Heyward Thomas Liberty Ship artificial reef had some experienced compromise from the strong and currents seas high associated with storm. the Ms. Birchett also observed an oil sheen on the surface and her dive masters a reported black ???€?oil-like???€? substance flowing from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Liberty Heyward Ship is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo of observed oil sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Following Fogg) the report, Fogg conducted an inspection with the goal of samples collecting of any oil-like observed substance. When he arrived at Liberty the ship he observed an oil sheen with small black droplets in a 100ft x 100ft area above the bow of the ship. A two-liter sample surface of water was in collected the of center the sheen. observed A dive was conducted by Okaloosa County staff to determine what the source of the leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Sally. Zoomed section in of a 3D model of the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship that was produced from data collected in October The large rectangle 2019. red illustrates the section of hull that has collapsed-in due to Hurricane Sally. The two smaller red circles indicate an approximate location of where an oil-like substance was observed rising below from deck. model This was created and provided to Okaloosa County by Reef Smart Alex (SOURCE: Guides. Fogg) Oil-like droplets were only observed in water the on column the bow of section the vessel and after closer inspection, two holes in the deck of the vessel were identified as the source of the leak. The was area monitored for approximately ten minutes and oil-like an substance was observed slowly seeping from the openings. Additionally, there was significant damage to the port side bow as hull the collapsed inward which may have disrupted once sealed bilge oil or tank material. ???€?We don???€?t know how much oil is in the vessel, it???€?s but leaking been for about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not a rapid leak, but it???€?s enough that and divers fishermen notice it. The State of Florida has working been with the Coast Guard to try and figure out a way to alleviate the issue by potentially going down there pumping and the rest of the out oil of the Liberty ship to prevent from it leaking into the environment.???€? Fogg says that reports coming are in on pretty much basis, a weekly especially after stretches of good weather when are people out there fishing and diving on it. The Thomas Hayward Ship Liberty was deployed as an artificial reef in April 1977. of Back then, the stringent rules regulatory that Fogg and his team have to abide by now were not in place, as far as making sure vessels reefs and are clean prior to putting them the in water. The deployment of Liberty ships was a collaboration the between State of Florida and the military where they deployed Liberty ships across Northern the Gulf of Mexico and even over to the east And coast. because the foot 400+ vessel is roughly 7 miles from east Destin???€?s it???€?s pass, a very popular fishing and diving site. hole A in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where an oil-like substance was leaking. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) This situation isn???€?t unique to Destin. A similar very scenario happened actually in Pensacola about 15 years ago. According to Fogg, one of the Liberty ships in the Pensacola area was leaking oil and authorities went and pumped it out. Fogg says he thinks there might be a similar situation that can happen with the Thomas Heyward. Because was it the 1970s, the information on the project is very spotty, and there is not much information how about it was cleaned. Authorities don???€?t know if the residual fuel oil was actually removed from the vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it stay would sealed for the rest its of life. Hearing of an oil leak, people many might start imagining the Deepwater Horizon spill, oil where there???€?s just a geyser of coming oil out of the ground. That???€?s not the case in this ???€?This is situation. a very slow leak with viscous very coming liquid from deck the of the Liberty continued ship,???€? As Fogg. for any environmental implications have that come from the leak over the past year, Fogg says that it is hard to relate any sort environmental of impacts to an incident this. like ???€?The site of the leak is actually home to a lot of fish and from the numerous investigation dives that we???€?ve done and I have not seen any impacts to the fish,???€? he said. ???€?I can???€?t say for sure but with the amount of oil leaking, that???€?s suspect I wouldn???€?t there???€?s going to be any major environmental impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets can be rising seen to the surface from a leak in Thomas the Heyward Liberty Artificial Ship Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Any sort of action to pump the remaining fuel oil from the Liberty ship will be handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As of this writing, there is no on timeline the removal of the residual oil, but the Coastal Resource Team will to continue monitor the leak provide and updates they as get them. [SEP] See the below article on the following website: https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico ******************************** Assessment of Sunken Liberty Ship Completed in Gulf Mexico of 4, APRIL 2022 U.S. ???€? Coast (USCG) Guard Sector Mobile recently completed the assessment operations the for WWII Liberty ship, Thomas Heyward, located in about 79 feet meters) (24 of water, miles four south of the Okaloosa Island Fishing Pier just north of the City Pensacola-Panama shipping lane. The vessel was intentionally on sunk April 14, 1977 off of Destin, Florida as an artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil from the bow of section the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Alex Fogg, Okaloosa County. Beginning back in September 2020, reports received by the Okaloosa USCG, County Sheriff???€?s department, and local a dive company indicated an intermittent dark oil discharge the from of bow the vessel. The vessel had significant damage, believed to have been caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area September 13-16, 2020. the At request of the USCG, OR&R began providing regarding scientific support risk assessment, resources at risk, and trajectory analysis for a potential release. A NOAA Marine Pollution Surveillance Report (MPSR) was issued for the in location September indicating 2020, a discharge from vessel the coinciding with passage the of Hurricane Sally. receipt Upon of
On October 21, 2020, was NOAA notified of a leak from SS the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship, now an artificial reef located of southwest Destin East Pass, FL. In September, sport divers reported oil sheen on the water surface and black "oil like" - substance flowing from the deck of ship the and the Okaloosa county diver an conducted inspection of the artificial reef and collected samples. Now, USCG requested assistance NOAA in identifying whether the ship is related to the Johnson Beach spill, reported after Hurricane Sally made landfall. [SEP] SS Thomas Heyward was a Liberty Maritime ship, Commission hull number built 236, by Drydock Alabama and Shipbuilding Company at Mobile, Alabama, laid down 21 February 1942, launched and May 31 1942.[3] It was named for Thomas Heyward, Jr. (28 July 1746 ???€? 6 March 1809), a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and of the Articles Confederation of as representative a of South Carolina. She was leased to Waterman Steamship Company delivered on and 31 July 1942. On 5 May 1946, the Thomas Heyward hit an unswept floating mine off of Europe.[4] Although damaged, the vessel made it back safely to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was placed in the Mobile in Reserve Fleet 1949, but was reactivated in 1951 for duty during the Korean War. After final retirement, the vessel was laid up in the James River in Virginia[6] for a time, then was purchased by the Florida Department of Natural Resources and prepared for final disposal as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut down to the first deck to meet U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for specifications artificial reef structures. It sunk was on 14 April 1977 off of Florida Destin, at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, miles four south of the Island Okaloosa north just pier of the Pensacola???€?Panama City shipping lane, in about 79 ft (24 m) water. of [SEP] Liberty Ship Schematic [SEP] https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Liberty Ship Artificial Reef slowly leaking oil off the beach of Destin By Jared Williams October 25, 2021 On Monday September 2020, 28, Coastal Resource Manager Alex Fogg was contacted by local dive operator Nancy Birchett of ScubaTech Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was completing their first offshore trip dive since Hurricane Sally when Birchett reported that the popular Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship artificial reef had experienced some damage from the strong currents high and seas associated with the storm. Ms. Birchett also observed an oil sheen the on and surface her dive masters reported a black ???€?oil-like???€? substance flowing from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Heyward Thomas Liberty Ship is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo of observed oil sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Following the report, Fogg conducted inspection an with the goal of of collecting any samples observed oil-like substance. When he arrived at the Liberty ship he observed sheen an oil with small black droplets in a 100ft x 100ft area the bow above of the A ship. sample two-liter of surface water was collected in the center of the observed sheen. A dive was conducted by Okaloosa County staff to determine the what source of the leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Sally. Zoomed in section of a 3D model the of Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was that produced from data collected in October The 2019. large red rectangle illustrates the of section that hull has collapsed-in due to Hurricane Sally. two The smaller red circles indicate an approximate location of where an oil-like substance was rising observed from below deck. This model was created and provided to Okaloosa County by Reef Smart (SOURCE: Guides. Alex Fogg) Oil-like droplets were only observed in the water column on the bow section of the vessel and after closer inspection, two holes in the deck of the vessel were identified as the source the of leak. The area was monitored for approximately ten minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly seeping from the Additionally, there was openings. significant damage to port the side bow as the hull collapsed inward which may have disrupted once sealed bilge oil or tank material. ???€?We don???€?t know how much oil is the in vessel, but it???€?s been leaking for about a now,???€? year said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not a rapid leak, but it???€?s enough that divers and notice fishermen it. The State of Florida has been working with the Coast Guard to try and figure out a way to alleviate the issue by potentially going down there and pumping the rest of the oil out of the Liberty ship to prevent it from leaking into the environment.???€? Fogg says that reports are coming in on pretty much a weekly basis, especially stretches of after good weather when people are out there fishing and diving on it. The Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was deployed as an artificial reef in April of 1977. Back then, stringent the regulatory rules that Fogg and his team to have by abide were now not in place, far as as making vessels sure and reefs are clean to prior putting them in water. the The deployment of ships Liberty was a collaboration between the State of and Florida the military where they deployed Liberty ships across the Gulf Northern of Mexico and even over to east the coast. And because the 400+ foot vessel is roughly 7 miles from Destin???€?s east pass, it???€?s a very popular fishing and diving site. A hole in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where oil-like an was substance leaking. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) This situation isn???€?t unique to Destin. A very similar scenario happened actually in Pensacola 15 about years ago. According to Fogg, one of the Liberty ships in the area Pensacola was leaking oil and authorities went and pumped it out. says Fogg he thinks there might a be similar situation that can happen with the Thomas Heyward. Because it was the 1970s, the information on the project very is spotty, and there is not information much about how it cleaned. was Authorities don???€?t know the if residual fuel oil was actually removed from the vessel or just was it sealed in off the hopes that it would stay sealed for rest the of its life. Hearing of an oil leak, many people might start imagining the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, where there???€?s just a oil geyser of coming out of ground. the That???€?s not the case in this situation. is ???€?This a very slow with leak very viscous liquid coming from the deck of the Liberty ship,???€? continued Fogg. As environmental any for implications that have come from the leak over the past year, says Fogg that it is hard to relate any sort of environmental impacts to an incident like ???€?The this. site of the leak is actually home to lot a of fish and from the numerous dives investigation that done we???€?ve and I have seen not any impacts to the he fish,???€? ???€?I said. can???€?t say for sure but with the amount of oil that???€?s I leaking, suspect wouldn???€?t there???€?s going to any be major environmental impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets can be seen rising to the surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Any sort of action to pump the remaining fuel oil from the ship Liberty will be handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As of this writing, is there no timeline on the removal of the residual oil, but the Coastal Resource Team will continue to monitor the leak provide and updates as get they them. [SEP] See the article on below the following https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico website: ******************************** Assessment of Sunken Ship Liberty Completed in Gulf Mexico of APRIL 4, 2022 ???€? U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Sector recently Mobile completed assessment the operations for the WWII Liberty ship, Thomas Heyward, located in about 79 feet (24 meters) of water, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island Fishing just Pier north of the Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. The vessel was intentionally sunk on April 14, 1977 off of Destin, Florida as an artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil from the section bow of the Heyward Thomas Ship Liberty Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Alex Fogg, Okaloosa County. Beginning back in September 2020, reports received by the USCG, Okaloosa County Sheriff???€?s department, and a local dive company indicated an intermittent dark oil discharge from the of bow vessel. the The vessel had significant damage, believed to have been caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area September 13-16, 2020. the At request of USCG, the OR&R began scientific providing support regarding risk resources assessment, at risk, and trajectory analysis for a potential release. A NOAA Marine Pollution Report Surveillance (MPSR) was issued for the in location September 2020, indicating a discharge from the vessel coinciding with the passage of Hurricane Sally. Upon receipt of
On October 21, 2020, NOAA was notified of a discharge from the SS Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship, now an artificial reef located southwest of Destin East Pass, In FL. September, sport divers reported fuel on sheen the water surface and black "oil - like" flowing substance deck from the of the ship and the Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of the artificial reef and collected samples. Now, USCG requested NOAA assistance in identifying whether ship is the related to the Johnson Beach reported spill, after Hurricane Sally made landfall. [SEP] SS Thomas Heyward was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull 236, number built by Alabama Drydock and Shipbuilding Company at Alabama, Mobile, laid down February 1942, 21 launched and 31 May 1942.[3] It was named for Thomas Heyward, Jr. (28 July 1746 6 ???€? March 1809), a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and the of Articles of Confederation as a representative of South Carolina. leased She to was Waterman Steamship and Company delivered 31 on July 1942. On 5 May 1946, Thomas the Heyward an hit unswept floating mine off of Europe.[4] Although damaged, the vessel made it safely back to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was placed in the Mobile Reserve Fleet in but 1949, was reactivated in 1951 for duty during the Korean After War. final the retirement, vessel was laid up the in James River in Virginia[6] for a time, then purchased by was the Florida Department Natural of and Resources for prepared disposal final as an reef artificial in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut down to the first deck to meet U.S. Army Corps Engineers of for specifications artificial reef structures. It was sunk on 14 April 1977 off of Destin, Florida at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four miles of south the Island Okaloosa pier just north of the Pensacola???€?Panama City shipping lane, about in 79 ft (24 m) of water. [SEP] Liberty Ship Schematic [SEP] https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Liberty Ship Artificial Reef slowly leaking oil off the shore of Destin By Jared Williams October 25, 2021 On Monday September 28, 2020, Coastal Resource Manager Fogg Alex was contacted by local dive operator Nancy Birchett of ScubaTech Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was their completing first offshore dive trip since Sally Hurricane when Birchett reported that the popular Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship artificial reef had experienced some rupture from the strong currents and high seas associated with the storm. Birchett Ms. also observed an oil sheen on the surface her and dive masters reported a black ???€?oil-like???€? substance flowing from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo observed of oil sheen. Alex (SOURCE: Fogg) the Following report, Fogg conducted an inspection with goal the of collecting samples of any observed oil-like substance. When he arrived at the Liberty ship observed he an oil sheen with small black droplets a in 100ft x area 100ft above bow the of ship. the A two-liter sample of surface water was collected in the center of observed the sheen. A dive was conducted Okaloosa by County staff to determine what the of source the leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Zoomed Sally. in section of a 3D model of the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship that was produced from data collected in October 2019. large The red rectangle the illustrates section of that hull has collapsed-in due to Hurricane Sally. The two smaller red circles indicate an approximate location where of an oil-like substance was observed rising from below deck. This model was created and provided to Okaloosa County by Reef Smart Guides. Alex (SOURCE: Fogg) Oil-like droplets were only observed in the water column on the section bow of the vessel and after closer inspection, two holes in the deck of the vessel identified were as the source of the leak. The area was monitored for ten approximately minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly seeping from openings. the Additionally, there was significant damage to the side port bow as the hull collapsed which inward may have disrupted once sealed bilge or tank oil material. ???€?We don???€?t know how much oil is in the but vessel, it???€?s been leaking for about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not a leak, rapid but it???€?s enough that divers and fishermen it. notice The State of Florida has been working with the Coast Guard to try and figure out a way to alleviate the issue by potentially going down there and pumping the rest of the oil out Liberty of the ship to prevent it from leaking into the environment.???€? Fogg says that reports coming are in pretty on much a weekly basis, especially after stretches of weather good when people are out there diving fishing and it. on The Thomas Liberty Hayward Ship was deployed as an artificial reef in April of 1977. Back the then, regulatory stringent that rules Fogg and his have team to abide by now were not in place, as far as making sure vessels and reefs are clean prior to putting them in the water. The deployment of ships Liberty was a collaboration between the State of the Florida and military they where deployed ships Liberty across the Northern Gulf Mexico of and even over to the east coast. And because the 400+ foot vessel is roughly 7 miles from Destin???€?s east pass, it???€?s a popular very fishing and diving site. hole A in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial where Reef an oil-like substance was leaking. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) This situation isn???€?t unique to Destin. A very similar scenario actually happened in Pensacola about 15 years ago. According to Fogg, one of the Liberty ships in Pensacola the area was leaking oil authorities and went and pumped it Fogg out. says he thinks there might be a similar situation that can with happen the Thomas Heyward. Because it was the 1970s, the information on the project is very spotty, there and is not much information about how it was cleaned. Authorities don???€?t know if the residual fuel oil was actually removed from the vessel or was it just sealed off the in hopes would that stay it sealed for the rest of its life. Hearing of an leak, oil many people might start imagining the Deepwater oil Horizon spill, where there???€?s just a geyser oil of coming out the of ground. not That???€?s case the in this situation. ???€?This is a very slow leak with very viscous liquid coming from the deck of Liberty the ship,???€? continued Fogg. As for any environmental implications that have come from the leak over the past year, Fogg says that it is hard to relate any sort of environmental impacts to an incident like this. ???€?The site of the leak is actually home to a lot of and fish from the numerous investigation dives that we???€?ve done and I have not seen any to fish,???€? impacts the he said. can???€?t ???€?I say for sure but with the amount of oil that???€?s leaking, I wouldn???€?t suspect there???€?s going to any be major environmental impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets can be seen rising to the surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Any sort of action to the pump remaining oil fuel from the Liberty ship will be handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As this of writing, there is no timeline on the of removal the residual oil, the but Coastal Resource will Team continue to monitor the leak and provide updates as they get them. [SEP] See the article below on the following website: https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico Assessment ******************************** of Sunken Liberty Ship in Completed Gulf of Mexico APRIL 4, 2022 ???€? U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Sector Mobile recently completed the assessment operations the for WWII Liberty Thomas ship, Heyward, located in about 79 feet (24 meters) of water, four south miles of the Okaloosa Island Fishing Pier just north of the Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. The vessel was intentionally sunk on April 14, 1977 off of Destin, Florida an as artificial reef Intermittent structure. discharge of oil from the bow section of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Alex Fogg, Okaloosa County. Beginning back in 2020, September reports received by the USCG, Okaloosa County Sheriff???€?s department, and a local indicated dive company an intermittent dark oil discharge from the bow of the The vessel vessel. had significant damage, believed to have been caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area September 13-16, 2020. At the request of the USCG, OR&R began scientific providing support regarding risk assessment, resources at risk, trajectory and analysis for potential a release. A NOAA Marine Pollution Surveillance Report (MPSR) was issued for the location in September 2020, indicating a discharge the from coinciding vessel with the passage of Hurricane Sally. Upon receipt of
On October 21, 2020, NOAA was notified of a spill from the SS Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship, now an artificial reef located of southwest Destin East Pass, FL. In September, sport divers crude reported sheen the water on surface and black "oil - like" substance flowing from the of deck ship the and the Okaloosa county diver an conducted inspection of the and artificial reef samples. collected USCG Now, requested NOAA assistance identifying in whether the ship is related to the Johnson Beach spill, reported after Hurricane Sally made landfall. [SEP] SS Thomas Heyward was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull number 236, built by Alabama Drydock Shipbuilding and Company at Alabama, Mobile, laid down 21 February 1942, and 31 launched May 1942.[3] was for It named Thomas Heyward, Jr. (28 July ???€? 6 1746 March 1809), a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and of the Articles of Confederation as a representative of South Carolina. She was leased to Waterman Steamship Company and delivered on 31 1942. July On 5 May 1946, the hit Thomas Heyward an unswept floating mine off of Europe.[4] Although damaged, the ship made it back safely to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was in placed the Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, but was reactivated in 1951 for duty during the Korean After War. final retirement, the vessel was laid up in the James River Virginia[6] for in a time, then was purchased by the Florida Department Natural of Resources and prepared for final disposal as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure down cut to first the deck to meet Army U.S. Corps Engineers of specifications for artificial reef structures. It was sunk 14 on April 1977 off of Destin, Florida 30??18???€?22.56???€?N at 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island pier just north of the Pensacola???€?Panama City shipping lane, about in 79 ft (24 m) water. of [SEP] Liberty Ship Schematic [SEP] Liberty https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Ship Artificial Reef slowly leaking oil off the coast of By Destin Williams Jared October 25, 2021 Monday On September 28, 2020, Resource Coastal Manager Alex Fogg was contacted by local dive operator Nancy of Birchett ScubaTech Northwest ScubaTech Florida. was completing first their offshore dive trip Hurricane since Sally when reported Birchett that popular the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship artificial reef had some experienced failure from the strong currents and high associated seas with the storm. Ms. Birchett also observed an oil on sheen the surface and her dive masters reported a black ???€?oil-like???€? substance flowing from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Heyward Ship Liberty is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo of oil observed sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) the Following report, Fogg inspection conducted an with the goal of collecting samples of any observed oil-like substance. When he arrived at the Liberty ship he observed an oil sheen with small black droplets in a 100ft x 100ft area above the bow of the ship. A two-liter sample of surface water was collected in center the of the observed sheen. A was dive conducted by Okaloosa County staff to determine what the source of the leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Sally. in Zoomed section of a 3D of model the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship that was produced from data collected in October 2019. The large red rectangle illustrates the of section hull that has collapsed-in due to Hurricane Sally. The two smaller red circles indicate an approximate location of an where oil-like substance was observed rising from below deck. This model created was and provided to Okaloosa by County Reef Smart Guides. Alex (SOURCE: Fogg) Oil-like droplets were only observed in the water column the on bow section the of vessel and after closer inspection, holes two the in deck of the vessel identified were as the source of the leak. The area was monitored for approximately ten and minutes oil-like an substance observed was slowly seeping from the openings. Additionally, there was significant damage to the port side bow as the hull collapsed inward which may have disrupted once sealed bilge or oil tank ???€?We material. know how don???€?t much oil is in the vessel, but it???€?s been leaking for about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not a rapid leak, but it???€?s enough that divers and fishermen notice it. The State of Florida has been working with the Coast Guard to try and figure a out way to the alleviate issue by potentially going down there and pumping the rest of the oil out of Liberty the ship it to prevent from leaking into the environment.???€? Fogg says that reports are coming in on pretty much a weekly basis, especially after stretches of weather good when people are out there fishing diving and on it. The Thomas Hayward Liberty was Ship deployed as an artificial in reef of April 1977. Back then, the stringent regulatory rules that Fogg and his team have to by abide now were not in place, far as as making sure vessels are and reefs clean prior to putting them in the water. The deployment of Liberty ships was a collaboration between the State of Florida the and military where deployed they Liberty ships across the Northern Gulf of Mexico and even over to the east coast. And because the 400+ foot vessel roughly is 7 miles from Destin???€?s east pass, it???€?s a very popular fishing and diving site. A hole in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where an oil-like substance was leaking. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) This isn???€?t situation to Destin. unique A very similar scenario actually happened in Pensacola about 15 years ago. According to Fogg, one of the Liberty in ships the Pensacola area was leaking oil and authorities went and pumped it Fogg out. says he thinks there might be similar a situation that can happen with the Thomas Heyward. Because was it the 1970s, the information on the project is very spotty, and there is not much information about how it was cleaned. Authorities don???€?t know if the fuel residual oil was actually removed from the vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it would stay sealed for the rest its of life. Hearing of an leak, oil many people might start imagining the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, where there???€?s just a geyser of oil coming out of the ground. That???€?s not the case in this situation. ???€?This is a very slow leak with very viscous liquid coming from the of deck the Liberty ship,???€? continued Fogg. As for any environmental implications that have come from the leak over the past year, Fogg says that it is hard to relate any sort environmental of impacts to an incident like this. ???€?The site of the leak is actually home to a lot of fish and from the investigation numerous dives that we???€?ve done and I have not seen any impacts to the fish,???€? he said. ???€?I say can???€?t sure for but the with amount of that???€?s oil leaking, I wouldn???€?t suspect there???€?s going to be any environmental major impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets be can seen rising to the surface from a leak in Thomas the Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Any Fogg) sort action of to pump the remaining fuel oil from the Liberty ship be will by handled the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As of this writing, there no is timeline on the removal of the residual oil, but the Coastal Resource Team continue will to the monitor leak and provide updates as they get them. [SEP] See the article below on the following https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico website: ******************************** Assessment of Sunken Liberty Ship Completed in Gulf of Mexico APRIL 4, 2022 ???€? U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Mobile Sector recently completed the assessment operations for the Liberty WWII ship, Thomas in Heyward, about located 79 feet (24 meters) of water, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island Fishing Pier just north of the Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. vessel The was intentionally sunk on April 14, 1977 off of Destin, Florida as an artificial structure. reef Intermittent discharge of oil from the bow of section the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Alex Fogg, Okaloosa County. Beginning back in September 2020, reports received by the USCG, Okaloosa County Sheriff???€?s a department, and dive local company indicated an intermittent dark oil discharge from the bow of the vessel. The vessel had significant damage, believed to have been caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area 13-16, September 2020. At the request of the USCG, OR&R began providing scientific support risk regarding assessment, resources at risk, and trajectory analysis for a potential release. A NOAA Pollution Marine Surveillance Report (MPSR) was issued for the location in September 2020, indicating a discharge from the vessel coinciding with the passage of Hurricane Sally. Upon of receipt
On October 2020, 21, NOAA was notified a of release from the SS Heyward Thomas Liberty Ship, now an artificial reef located southwest of Destin East Pass, FL. In September, sport divers reported crude sheen on the surface water and "oil black - like" substance flowing from the deck of the ship and the Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of the reef artificial and collected samples. Now, USCG requested NOAA in assistance identifying the whether ship is related to Johnson the Beach spill, reported after Hurricane made Sally landfall. [SEP] Heyward SS Thomas was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission number hull 236, built by Alabama Drydock and Shipbuilding Company at Mobile, Alabama, laid 21 down February and 1942, launched 31 1942.[3] May It was named for Thomas Heyward, Jr. July (28 1746 ???€? 6 March 1809), a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and of the Articles of Confederation as a representative of South Carolina. She leased was to Waterman Steamship Company and delivered on 31 July 1942. On 5 May 1946, the Thomas Heyward hit an unswept floating mine off of Although Europe.[4] damaged, the boat made it safely back to port for repairs.[5] vessel The was placed the in Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, but was reactivated in for duty 1951 during the Korean War. After final retirement, vessel the was laid up in the James River in Virginia[6] for a time, then was purchased by the Department Florida of Natural Resources and prepared for disposal final as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut down to the first deck to meet U.S. Army Corps of Engineers specifications for artificial structures. reef was It sunk 14 on April 1977 off of Destin, Florida at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N four 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, miles south of the Island Okaloosa pier north just of the Pensacola???€?Panama City shipping lane, in about 79 ft m) (24 of water. [SEP] Ship Liberty Schematic https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ [SEP] Liberty Ship Reef Artificial slowly leaking oil the off coast of Destin By Jared Williams October 25, On 2021 Monday September 28, 2020, Coastal Resource Manager Alex Fogg was contacted by dive local operator Nancy Birchett of ScubaTech Northwest ScubaTech Florida. was completing their first offshore dive trip since Hurricane when Sally Birchett reported that the popular Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship artificial reef had some experienced damage from the strong currents and high seas associated with the storm. Birchett Ms. also observed an oil sheen on the surface and her dive masters reported a black ???€?oil-like???€? substance flowing from the deck of Thomas the Heyward. The Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo of observed oil sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Following the report, Fogg conducted an inspection with the goal of collecting of samples any observed oil-like substance. When he arrived at the Liberty ship he observed an oil sheen with small in black droplets a 100ft x 100ft area above the bow of the ship. A two-liter sample of water surface was collected in the center of the observed sheen. A dive was conducted by County Okaloosa staff to determine what the source of the leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Sally. Zoomed of in section a 3D of model the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship that was produced from collected data in October 2019. The large red rectangle illustrates the section of hull that has due collapsed-in to Hurricane The Sally. two smaller red circles indicate an approximate location of where an oil-like substance was rising observed from below deck. This model was created and provided to Okaloosa County by Smart Reef Guides. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Oil-like were droplets only observed the in column water on bow the section of the vessel and after closer two inspection, holes the in deck of the vessel were identified as the source of the leak. The area was monitored for approximately ten minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly from seeping openings. the Additionally, there was damage significant to the port side bow as the hull collapsed inward which may have disrupted once sealed bilge or oil tank material. ???€?We don???€?t know how much oil is in the vessel, but it???€?s been leaking for a about year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not a rapid leak, but it???€?s enough divers that and fishermen notice it. The State of Florida has been working with the Coast Guard to try figure and out a way alleviate to the issue by potentially going down there and pumping the rest of the oil out of the Liberty ship to prevent it leaking from into the environment.???€? Fogg says reports that are coming in pretty on much a weekly basis, especially after stretches of good weather when people are out fishing there and on diving The it. Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was deployed as an artificial reef in of April 1977. Back the then, stringent regulatory rules that Fogg and his team have to by abide now were not in place, as far as sure making vessels reefs and are to clean prior putting them in the water. The deployment of Liberty ships was a collaboration between the State of Florida and the military where they deployed Liberty ships across the Northern Gulf of Mexico and even over to the east coast. because And the 400+ foot vessel is 7 roughly miles from east Destin???€?s pass, it???€?s a very popular fishing and diving site. A hole in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where an substance oil-like was leaking. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) This situation isn???€?t unique to Destin. A very similar scenario actually happened in Pensacola about 15 ago. years According to Fogg, one of the Liberty ships in area the Pensacola was oil leaking and authorities went and pumped it out. Fogg says he thinks might there be a similar situation can that happen with the Thomas Heyward. Because it was the 1970s, the information on the project is very and spotty, there is not much information about was how it cleaned. Authorities don???€?t if know the residual fuel oil was actually removed the from vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it would stay sealed for the rest of its life. Hearing of an leak, oil many people might start the imagining Deepwater Horizon oil spill, just where there???€?s a geyser of coming oil out of the ground. That???€?s not the in case this situation. ???€?This is a very leak slow with very viscous liquid coming from the deck of the ship,???€? Liberty continued Fogg. As for any environmental implications that have come from the leak over the past year, says Fogg that it is hard to relate any sort of environmental impacts to an like this. incident ???€?The of site the leak is actually home to a lot of fish from and the numerous investigation dives that we???€?ve done and have I not seen any impacts to the fish,???€? he said. ???€?I can???€?t say sure for but the with amount of oil that???€?s leaking, I wouldn???€?t there???€?s suspect going to be any major environmental impacts.???€? Small oil-like droplets can be seen rising to the surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Any sort action of to pump the remaining fuel oil from the Liberty ship will be handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As of this writing, there is no on timeline the removal of the residual oil, but the Coastal Resource Team continue will to monitor the leak and provide updates they as get them. [SEP] See the article below on the following website: https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico Assessment ******************************** of Sunken Liberty Ship Completed in Gulf of Mexico APRIL 4, 2022 ???€? U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Mobile Sector recently completed the assessment operations for the WWII Liberty ship, Thomas Heyward, located in about 79 feet (24 meters) of water, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island Fishing Pier just the north of Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. vessel The was intentionally on sunk April 1977 14, off of Destin, Florida as an artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil from the bow section of the Thomas Liberty Heyward Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Fogg, Alex Okaloosa County. Beginning in back September 2020, received reports by the USCG, County Okaloosa Sheriff???€?s department, and a local dive company indicated an intermittent dark oil discharge from the bow of the vessel. The vessel had significant damage, believed to been have caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area September 13-16, At 2020. the request of the USCG, OR&R began providing scientific support risk regarding assessment, resources at risk, and analysis trajectory for a potential A release. NOAA Marine Pollution Surveillance Report (MPSR) was issued for the location in September 2020, indicating a discharge from the vessel coinciding with the passage of Hurricane Sally. Upon receipt of
On October 21, 2020, NOAA was notified of a discharge from the SS Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship, now an artificial reef located southwest of Destin East Pass, FL. In September, sport divers reported oil sheen on the water surface and black "oil - like" substance flowing from the deck of the ship and the Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of the artificial reef and collected samples. Now, USCG requested NOAA assistance in identifying the ship whether is related to Johnson Beach the spill, reported after Hurricane Sally made landfall. [SEP] SS Thomas Heyward was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull number 236, built by Alabama Drydock and at Shipbuilding Company Mobile, Alabama, laid down 21 February 1942, and launched 31 May 1942.[3] It was named for Thomas Heyward, (28 Jr. 1746 ???€? July 6 1809), March a signer of the United States Declaration Independence of and of the Articles of Confederation as a representative South of Carolina. She was leased Waterman to Steamship Company and delivered on July 31 1942. On 5 May 1946, the Thomas Heyward hit an unswept floating mine off of Europe.[4] Although damaged, the made vessel it safely back to port repairs.[5] for The vessel was placed in the Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, was but in reactivated 1951 for duty during the Korean War. After retirement, final the vessel laid was up in the James River in Virginia[6] for a time, then was purchased by the Florida Department of Natural Resources and prepared for final disposal as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut down to the first deck to meet U.S. Army Corps of Engineers specifications for artificial structures. reef It was sunk on 14 April 1977 off of Destin, Florida at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island pier just north of the Pensacola???€?Panama City shipping lane, in about 79 ft (24 m) of water. [SEP] Liberty Ship Schematic [SEP] https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Liberty Ship Artificial Reef slowly leaking oil off the of Destin coast By Jared Williams October 25, 2021 On Monday September 28, 2020, Coastal Resource Manager Alex Fogg was contacted by local dive operator Nancy Birchett of ScubaTech Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was completing their first offshore dive trip since Sally Hurricane when Birchett reported the that popular Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship artificial reef had experienced some damage from the strong currents and high seas associated with the Ms. storm. Birchett also observed an sheen on oil the surface and her masters dive reported black a substance ???€?oil-like???€? flowing from the deck the of Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Liberty Heyward Ship is located approximately 6.65nm southwest of Destin East Pass. Topside photo observed of oil sheen. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Following the report, Fogg conducted an inspection the with goal of collecting samples of any observed oil-like substance. When he arrived the at Liberty ship he observed an oil with sheen small black droplets a in 100ft x 100ft area above the bow of the ship. two-liter A sample of surface water was collected in the center of the observed A sheen. dive was conducted Okaloosa by County staff to determine what the source of the was and leak to assess from damage Hurricane Sally. Zoomed in section of a 3D model of the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was that produced from data collected in October 2019. The large red rectangle illustrates the of section hull that collapsed-in has due to Hurricane Sally. The two smaller red indicate circles an approximate location of where an oil-like substance was observed rising from below deck. This model was created provided and Okaloosa to County by Reef Smart Guides. (SOURCE: Alex Oil-like Fogg) droplets were only observed in the water column the on bow section of the vessel and after closer inspection, two holes in the deck of the were vessel identified as the source of the leak. The area was for approximately monitored ten minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly seeping from the openings. Additionally, there was significant damage to the port side bow as the hull collapsed inward which may have disrupted once sealed bilge or oil tank material. ???€?We know don???€?t how much oil is in vessel, but the it???€?s been for leaking about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not rapid a but leak, it???€?s enough that divers and fishermen notice it. The State of Florida has been working with the Guard Coast to try figure and a out way to alleviate the issue by potentially down going there and pumping the rest of the oil out of the Liberty ship to prevent it from leaking into environment.???€? Fogg the says that reports are coming in on pretty much a weekly basis, especially after stretches of good weather when are people out there fishing and diving on it. The Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was deployed as artificial an in reef April 1977. of Back then, the regulatory stringent rules that Fogg and his team have to abide by were now not in as far place, as making sure vessels reefs and are clean to prior putting them in the water. The deployment of Liberty ships was a between collaboration the State of Florida and the military where they deployed Liberty across ships the Gulf Northern of and even Mexico over east to the coast. And because the 400+ foot vessel roughly is 7 miles from east Destin???€?s pass, it???€?s a very popular fishing and diving site. hole A in deck the of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where oil-like an substance leaking. was (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) isn???€?t This situation unique to Destin. A very similar actually scenario happened in Pensacola about 15 years ago. According to Fogg, one of the ships Liberty in the Pensacola area was leaking and oil authorities went and pumped it out. Fogg says he thinks there might be a similar situation that can happen with the Thomas Heyward. Because it the was 1970s, the on information project the is spotty, and very is there not much information about it how was Authorities cleaned. know don???€?t if the residual fuel oil actually was removed from the vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it would stay for sealed the rest its of life. Hearing of an oil leak, many people might start imagining Deepwater the Horizon oil spill, where there???€?s just a geyser oil of coming out of the ground. That???€?s not the case in this situation. ???€?This is a very slow leak with very viscous liquid coming from the deck of the Liberty ship,???€? continued Fogg. As for any environmental implications that have come from the leak over the past year, says Fogg that it is hard to relate any sort of environmental impacts to an incident like this. ???€?The site of leak the is actually home to a lot of and from fish the numerous investigation dives that we???€?ve done and I have not seen any impacts to the he fish,???€? said. ???€?I can???€?t say for sure but the with amount of oil leaking, that???€?s I wouldn???€?t suspect there???€?s going to any be major environmental impacts.???€? Small droplets oil-like can be seen rising to the surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Any sort of action to the pump remaining fuel oil from the Liberty ship be will handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and the State of Florida. As this of writing, is there no timeline on the removal the of residual oil, the but Coastal Resource will Team continue to monitor the leak and provide updates as get they them. [SEP] See the article below on the following website: https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico ******************************** Assessment of Liberty Sunken Ship Completed Gulf in of Mexico APRIL 4, 2022 ???€? U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Sector Mobile recently completed the assessment operations for the WWII Liberty Thomas ship, Heyward, in located about 79 feet (24 meters) of water, four miles south the of Okaloosa Island Fishing just Pier north of the Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. The vessel was intentionally sunk on April 14, 1977 off of Destin, Florida as an artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil from the bow section of Thomas the Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image credit: Fogg, Alex Okaloosa Beginning County. back in September 2020, reports received by the USCG, Okaloosa County Sheriff???€?s department, and a local dive company indicated an intermittent dark oil from discharge the bow the of vessel. The vessel had significant damage, believed to have been caused by Hurricane which Sally, impacted the area September 13-16, 2020. At the request of the OR&R USCG, began providing scientific support regarding risk assessment, resources at and risk, trajectory analysis for a potential A release. NOAA Marine Surveillance Pollution Report (MPSR) was for issued the location in September 2020, indicating a discharge vessel from the coinciding with the passage of Sally. Hurricane Upon receipt of
On October 21, 2020, NOAA was notified of a spill from the SS Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship, now an artificial reef located southwest of Destin East Pass, FL. In September, sport divers reported fuel sheen on the water surface and black "oil - like" substance from the flowing deck of the ship and the Okaloosa county diver conducted an inspection of artificial the reef and collected samples. Now, USCG requested NOAA assistance in identifying whether the ship is related to the Johnson Beach spill, reported after Sally Hurricane made landfall. [SEP] SS Thomas Heyward was a Liberty ship, Maritime Commission hull number 236, built by Alabama Drydock and Shipbuilding at Company Alabama, Mobile, laid down 21 February 1942, and launched 31 May 1942.[3] It was named Thomas for Heyward, Jr. July (28 1746 ???€? 6 March 1809), a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence of and the Articles of Confederation as a representative of South Carolina. She leased was to Waterman Company Steamship and delivered on 31 July 1942. On 5 May 1946, the Thomas Heyward hit an unswept floating mine off of Europe.[4] Although damaged, vessel the made it safely back to port for repairs.[5] The vessel was placed in the Mobile Reserve Fleet in 1949, but was reactivated in 1951 for duty during the Korean War. After final retirement, the vessel was laid up in the James River in Virginia[6] for a then time, was purchased by the Department Florida Natural of Resources and prepared for disposal final as an artificial reef in a Pascagoula, Mississippi salvage yard with the superstructure cut to down the deck first to meet U.S. Army Corps of Engineers specifications for artificial reef It structures. was on sunk 14 April 1977 off of Destin, Florida at 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?WCoordinates: 30??18???€?22.56???€?N 86??36???€?13.32???€?W, four south miles of the Okaloosa Island just pier north of the Pensacola???€?Panama City shipping lane, in about 79 (24 m) ft of water. [SEP] Liberty Ship [SEP] Schematic https://www.getthecoast.com/liberty-ship-artificial-reef-slowly-leaking-oil-off-the-coast-of-destin/ Liberty Ship Artificial slowly Reef leaking oil off the coast of Destin By Jared Williams October 25, 2021 On September Monday 28, 2020, Coastal Resource Manager Alex Fogg was contacted by local dive operator Nancy Birchett of ScubaTech Northwest Florida. ScubaTech was completing their first offshore dive trip since Hurricane Sally when Birchett reported that the popular Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship artificial reef had experienced some from damage the currents strong and high seas associated with the storm. Ms. Birchett also observed an oil sheen on the surface and her dive masters a reported black ???€?oil-like???€? flowing substance from the deck of the Thomas Heyward. The Thomas Liberty Heyward Ship is located approximately 6.65nm of southwest Destin East Pass. Topside photo of observed oil (SOURCE: sheen. Alex Fogg) Following the report, Fogg conducted an inspection with the goal of collecting samples any of observed oil-like substance. When he at arrived the ship Liberty he observed an oil sheen with small black droplets in a 100ft x 100ft area above the bow of the ship. A two-liter sample of surface was water collected in the center of the sheen. observed A dive was conducted Okaloosa by County staff to determine what the source of the leak was and to assess damage from Hurricane Sally. Zoomed in section of a 3D model of the Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship that was produced from data collected in October 2019. The large red rectangle illustrates the of section hull that has collapsed-in due to Hurricane Sally. The two red smaller circles indicate an approximate location of where an oil-like substance was rising observed from below deck. This model was and created provided to County Okaloosa by Smart Reef Guides. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) droplets Oil-like only were observed in the water column on the bow section of the vessel and after closer inspection, two holes in the deck of the vessel were identified as the source of the The leak. area monitored was approximately ten for minutes and an oil-like substance was observed slowly seeping from openings. the Additionally, there was damage to significant the port side bow as the hull collapsed inward which may have disrupted once sealed bilge oil or tank material. ???€?We know don???€?t how much oil is in the vessel, but it???€?s been for leaking about a year now,???€? said Fogg. ???€?It???€?s not a rapid leak, but it???€?s enough that divers fishermen and notice it. The State of Florida has been working with the Guard try Coast to and figure out a way to the alleviate issue by potentially going down there and pumping the rest of the oil out of the Liberty ship to prevent it from leaking into the environment.???€? Fogg says that are reports in coming on pretty a much weekly basis, especially after stretches of good weather when people are out there fishing and diving on it. The Thomas Hayward Liberty Ship was deployed as an artificial reef in April of 1977. Back then, the stringent regulatory rules that Fogg and his team have to abide by now were not in place, as far as making sure vessels and reefs are clean prior to putting them in The the water. deployment of ships Liberty was a collaboration State between the of Florida and the military where they deployed Liberty ships across the Northern Gulf of Mexico and even over to the east coast. And because 400+ the foot vessel roughly is 7 miles from Destin???€?s east pass, it???€?s a very popular fishing and site. diving A hole in the deck of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef where an oil-like substance was Alex leaking. (SOURCE: Fogg) This situation isn???€?t unique to Destin. A very similar scenario happened actually in Pensacola about years ago. 15 According to Fogg, of one the Liberty ships in the Pensacola area was leaking oil and authorities went and pumped it out. Fogg says thinks there might he be a similar situation that can happen with the Thomas Heyward. it was Because the 1970s, the information on the is project very spotty, and there is not much how information about it was cleaned. Authorities don???€?t know if the fuel residual oil actually was removed the from vessel or was it just sealed off in the hopes that it would stay sealed for the rest of its life. Hearing an of oil leak, might many people start imagining the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, where there???€?s just a geyser of oil coming out of ground. the That???€?s not the case in situation. this ???€?This is a very slow leak with very viscous liquid coming from the deck Liberty of the ship,???€? continued Fogg. As environmental for any implications have that come from the leak over past the year, Fogg that says it is hard to relate any sort of environmental impacts to an incident like this. ???€?The site of the leak is actually home a to lot of fish and from the numerous investigation dives that we???€?ve done and I have not any seen impacts to the fish,???€? he said. ???€?I can???€?t say for sure but with the amount of oil that???€?s I leaking, suspect wouldn???€?t there???€?s going to be any major impacts.???€? environmental Small oil-like droplets can be seen rising the to surface from a leak in the Thomas Heyward Artificial Liberty Ship Reef. (SOURCE: Alex Fogg) Any sort of action to pump the remaining fuel oil from the Liberty ship will be handled by the U.S. Coast Guard and State the of Florida. As of this writing, there is no timeline on the removal of the residual oil, but the Coastal Resource Team will to continue monitor the leak and provide updates they as them. get [SEP] the See article below the on following website: https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/assessment-sunken-liberty-ship-completed-gulf-mexico Assessment ******************************** of Liberty Sunken Completed Ship in Gulf Mexico of APRIL 2022 4, ???€? U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Sector Mobile recently completed the assessment operations for WWII the ship, Liberty Heyward, Thomas located in about 79 feet (24 meters) of water, four miles south of the Okaloosa Island Fishing Pier just north of the Pensacola-Panama City shipping lane. vessel The was intentionally sunk on April 1977 14, off of Destin, Florida an as artificial reef structure. Intermittent discharge of oil from the bow section of the Thomas Heyward Liberty Ship Artificial Reef. September 28, 2020. Image Alex credit: Fogg, Okaloosa County. Beginning back in September 2020, reports received by the USCG, Okaloosa County Sheriff???€?s department, and a local dive company indicated an intermittent dark oil discharge from the bow the of vessel. The vessel significant had damage, believed to have been caused by Hurricane Sally, which impacted the area 2020. September 13-16, At the request of the USCG, OR&R began providing scientific support regarding risk assessment, resources at risk, and trajectory analysis a for potential release. A NOAA Marine Pollution Surveillance Report (MPSR) was issued for the location in September 2020, indicating a discharge from the vessel coinciding the with passage of Hurricane Sally. Upon of receipt
U.S. Navy SUPSALV has contacted the NOAA SSC for the Pacific Islands to request support trajectory the event in of an oil release during planned operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. The 700-foot German heavy cruiser sank in 1946 December but still contains fuel The oil. NOAA ERD Scientific Support Team is putting together information on the likely oil in trajectory the event a of release, as well as information on chemistry and expected persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil [SEP] . US Navy SupSalv article following completion of salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. SUPSALV Navy has the contacted NOAA for SSC the Pacific Islands to request trajectory support in the event of an oil release during planned operations on the Ex-USS sunken PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. The 700-foot German cruiser heavy sank in December 1946 still but contains fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Support Team is putting together information on the likely oil trajectory in the event of a release, as well as information on chemistry and expected of persistence Navy Special Fuel Oil . [SEP] US Navy SupSalv article following of completion salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. Navy SUPSALV has contacted the NOAA for SSC the Pacific Islands to request trajectory support in the event of an oil release during planned operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Republic Atoll, of the Marshall Islands. 700-foot German The heavy cruiser in sank December 1946 but still contains oil. The fuel NOAA ERD Scientific Support Team is putting information together on the likely oil trajectory in the event of a release, as well as information on and chemistry expected persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil . [SEP] US Navy SupSalv article following of completion salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. Navy SUPSALV contacted has the NOAA SSC for the Pacific Islands to request trajectory support in the event of an oil release during planned operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. The 700-foot German heavy cruiser sank in December but 1946 still contains fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Team Support is putting together information the on likely oil trajectory in the event of a as release, well as on information chemistry and expected persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil . [SEP] US Navy SupSalv article following completion salvage/oil of operations. recovery https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. SUPSALV Navy has contacted the NOAA SSC the for Pacific Islands to request trajectory in support the event of an oil release during planned operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. 700-foot The German heavy cruiser sank in December 1946 but contains still fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Team Support is putting together information on likely the oil trajectory in the event of a release, well as as information on chemistry and expected persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil [SEP] . US Navy article SupSalv following completion of salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. Navy SUPSALV has contacted the NOAA SSC for the Pacific Islands to request trajectory in support the event an of fuel release during planned on operations the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall The Islands. 700-foot German heavy cruiser sank in December 1946 still but contains fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Support Team is putting information together on the likely oil trajectory the in event of a release, as well as on information chemistry and expected persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil . [SEP] US Navy SupSalv article following completion of salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. Navy has SUPSALV contacted the NOAA SSC for the Pacific Islands to request trajectory support in the event of an release product during planned operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. The 700-foot German heavy cruiser sank in December 1946 still but contains fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Support Scientific Team is putting together information on the likely oil trajectory in the of a event release, as well as information on and chemistry persistence expected of Navy Special Oil Fuel . [SEP] Navy US SupSalv article following completion of salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. Navy SUPSALV has contacted the SSC NOAA for the Islands Pacific to request trajectory support in the event of an product release during planned operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. The German 700-foot heavy cruiser sank in December but 1946 still contains fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Support Team is putting information together on the likely trajectory oil in the event of a as release, well as information on chemistry expected and persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil [SEP] . US Navy SupSalv article completion following of salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
U.S. Navy SUPSALV has contacted the NOAA SSC for the Pacific Islands to trajectory request in support the event of an petroleum release during planned operations on the sunken Ex-USS PRINZ EUGEN in Kwajalein Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands. The 700-foot heavy German sank cruiser in 1946 December but still contains fuel oil. The NOAA ERD Scientific Support Team is putting on together information the likely trajectory oil in the event of a release, as well as information on chemistry and expected persistence of Navy Special Fuel Oil . [SEP] US Navy SupSalv article following completion of salvage/oil recovery operations. https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article/1680680/joint-us-navyarmy-team-removes-oil-from-sunken-wwii-ship/
On July 10, 2017, the NOAA SSC was notified by the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service of (NESDIS) an anomaly on satellite images in Nantucket Sound that may be from oil sheen from one of several historic wrecks in the region. [SEP] Information from the LRAUV mission be can seen real-time near on a accessible publicly website. 1. Once on the website, click the "Dash4" tab. 2. Click the + button to select a vehicle. Click the on word "polaris" to access the log and data. 3. "log" The tab shows actions taken by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners. 4. Click on the tab "data" to see data that is being gathered and in the various it formats is being displayed and summarized. Some of this data is being incorporated and in displayed ERMA. Data [SEP] from this mission can be retrieved online at https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ Information [SEP] and updates can situation viewed be here on ERMA. [SEP] Here is additional information on LRAUV WHOI's for program oil under-ice discharge detection. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute long-range (WHOI) underwater autonomous vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene at the Wreck 1487 site in the early of hours 24 Jan 2022. The site is approximately nm 70 south of Nantucket. The USCG assisted in WHOI launching the LRAUV transit to save time and battery power. After launch, several calibration were tests completed, and then it took a few days the for to LRAUV transit to the research site. Durign the trip, WHOI identified, but was able to isolate, and ground fault error that could have potentially jeopardized its mission. Once on scene, the LRAUV began grid pattern searches through the looking area to identify or "sniff out" hydrocarbons from the leaking wreck site. in Early the morning of 24 Jan, a NESDIS from update satellite Sentinel 1A identified an oil sheen NE of the site. The information was shared with WHOI who, response, in is moving the LRAUV the into where area the sheen was identified. WHOI has live that information is being shared through a so website the public can see mission information and data that is being gathered. Some of that information is also being posted, as available, on ERMA. Detailed information on accessing WHOI the website and mission data be will shared in a separate post. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) is sending a Long Autonomous Range Underwater Vehicle (LRAUV) designed to detect potential oil spills on a run test to a known sunken vessel that is leaking. actively The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will travel to a known shipwreck labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south of Nantucket, to test the sensitivity of an optical sensor and then see how well WHOI???€?s adaptive mission can survey sniff out and map out an oil plume. The frequently (potentially constantly) wreck leaking hopefully will serve as real-world a proxy. Data will be collected from the following sensors: Up/down 1200 kHz ADCP (RDI) SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck Seabird glider payload CTD with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic artificial radiation More specifically, data also includes and is gathered in the following manner: UV-A SeaOWL ???€? CHL, FDOM, and Optical (OBS) backscatter CTD Conductivity, ???€? Water Temp, and Depth DO Optode ???€? DO Concentration and Saturation DO data Merged streams calibrated to common sampling rate of 1/second All sensor data retrieved as a .csv file (lat/lon/depth) AUV Fluorometry products OBS as function a of FDOM, 3D 3D OBS/FDOM, data model Data transfer: Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time: Merged data stream ~15 minutes NOAA has coordinated and provided background information to WHOI help to the prepare group for and plan their mission. NESDIS has shared satellite imagery from leaking the source, which was analyzed also through ERMA to identify a likely location for the wreck. ORR has shared RULET background information, ocean current information, and helped coordination with between WHOI and USCG Sector Southeastern New England. USCG The will be following the mission and studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Prediction Ocean Center is providing detailed specific on-site offshore weather forecasts for the area. The mission is to planned commence on the morning Jan of 20. It is likely transit that the time for the LRAUV to arrive on site will be approximately 3 days. Then the LRAUV will stay on site for 7-10 days before returning to land. operational Daily briefs including staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are for scheduled the duration of the mission. Information data and gathered during the mission will be displayed ERMA in and updates will be provided in ResponseLink.
On July 10, 2017, the NOAA was SSC notified by the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) an of anomaly on satellite images in Sound Nantucket that may be from product sheen from one several of historic in wrecks the region. [SEP] from Information LRAUV the mission can be seen near real-time on publicly a accessible website. 1. Once on the website, click the "Dash4" tab. 2. the Click + to button select a vehicle. Click the on word "polaris" to access the log data. and 3. The "log" tab shows actions taken by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners. 4. Click on the "data" tab to see data that is being gathered and the in various formats it is being displayed and summarized. of Some this data is being incorporated and displayed in ERMA. [SEP] Data from this mission can be retrieved online at https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ [SEP] situation Information and updates can be viewed here on ERMA. Here additional [SEP] is information on WHOI's program for LRAUV under-ice spill oil detection. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) long-range autonomous underwater vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene at the Wreck 1487 site in the early hours of 24 Jan 2022. The is site approximately 70 nm south of Nantucket. USCG The assisted WHOI in launching the LRAUV to save transit time battery and power. After launch, several calibration tests were completed, and it then took a few days for the LRAUV to transit to the research Durign site. the trip, identified, WHOI but was able to isolate, and ground fault error that could have potentially jeopardized its mission. Once on scene, the LRAUV began grid pattern through searches the area looking to identify or "sniff out" hydrocarbons from the leaking wreck site. Early in the morning of 24 Jan, a NESDIS update from satellite Sentinel 1A identified an oil sheen NE the of The site. information was shared with WHOI response, who, in is moving the LRAUV into the area where the sheen was identified. WHOI has live information that is being shared through a website so the public can see mission information and data that is being gathered. Some of that information is also being posted, as available, on Detailed ERMA. accessing information on the WHOI website and mission data will be shared in a separate post. The Woods [SEP] Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) is sending a Long Range Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (LRAUV) designed to potential detect oil spills on a test run to a known tanker sunken that is actively leaking. The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will travel to a known shipwreck labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south of Nantucket, to test the sensitivity of an optical sensor and then see how well WHOI???€?s adaptive mission survey sniff can out and map out oil an plume. The frequently (potentially constantly) leaking wreck will hopefully serve as a real-world proxy. Data will be collected from the following sensors: 1200 Up/down kHz (RDI) ADCP SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck Seabird glider payload CTD with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic artificial radiation More specifically, also data includes is and gathered in the following manner: SeaOWL ???€? UV-A CHL, FDOM, and Optical backscatter (OBS) CTD ???€? Conductivity, Water Temp, and Depth DO Optode ???€? DO Concentration and DO Merged Saturation data streams calibrated to common sampling rate of 1/second All sensor data retrieved as a .csv file AUV (lat/lon/depth) Fluorometry products OBS as a function of FDOM, 3D 3D data OBS/FDOM, model Data transfer: Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time: Merged data ~15 minutes stream NOAA has coordinated and provided information background WHOI to to help the group for prepare and plan their mission. NESDIS shared has satellite imagery from the leaking source, which was analyzed also through ERMA to identify a likely location for the ORR wreck. has shared RULET information, background information, ocean current helped and with coordination between WHOI and USCG Sector Southeastern England. New The USCG will be following the mission and studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Ocean Prediction Center providing detailed is specific on-site offshore weather forecasts for the area. The mission is planned to commence on the morning of 20. Jan It is likely that the transit time for the LRAUV to arrive site on will be approximately 3 days. Then LRAUV the will on stay site for 7-10 days before returning to land. Daily briefs operational including staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are scheduled for the duration of the mission. Information and data gathered during the will mission be displayed in ERMA and updates will be provided in ResponseLink.
On July 10, 2017, the NOAA SSC was notified the by National Satellite, Environmental Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) of an anomaly on satellite images in Nantucket Sound that may from be oil sheen from one of several historic wrecks in the region. [SEP] Information from the LRAUV mission can be seen near real-time on a publicly accessible website. 1. Once on the click website, the "Dash4" tab. 2. Click the + button to select a vehicle. Click on the word "polaris" to access the log and data. 3. The tab "log" shows actions taken by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners. 4. Click the "data" on tab to see data that is gathered being and in the various formats it is being displayed and summarized. Some of this data is being incorporated and displayed in ERMA. [SEP] Data from this can mission be retrieved online at [SEP] https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ Information and situation updates can be viewed here on ERMA. [SEP] Here is additional information on LRAUV WHOI's program for under-ice oil release [SEP] detection. Woods The Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) long-range autonomous underwater vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene at the Wreck site 1487 in the early hours of 24 Jan 2022. The site is approximately 70 nm south of Nantucket. The USCG assisted WHOI in launching the LRAUV to transit save time battery and power. After launch, several calibration tests were completed, and then it took a days few for the LRAUV to transit to the research site. Durign the trip, WHOI identified, but was able to isolate, and ground fault error that could have potentially jeopardized mission. its Once the on scene, LRAUV began grid pattern searches through the area looking to identify or "sniff out" from hydrocarbons the leaking wreck site. Early in the morning of 24 Jan, a NESDIS update from satellite Sentinel 1A identified an oil sheen NE the of site. The information was shared with WHOI who, in response, is moving the LRAUV into the area where the was sheen WHOI identified. has live information that is being shared through a website so the public can see mission information and that data is being gathered. Some that of information is also being posted, as available, on ERMA. Detailed information accessing on the WHOI website and mission data will be shared in a separate post. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic (WHOI) Institute is sending a Long Range Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (LRAUV) to designed potential detect oil spills on a test run to a known sunken vessel that is actively leaking. The ???€?Polaris???€? LRAUV, will travel to a known shipwreck labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south of Nantucket, test to the sensitivity of optical an sensor and then how see well WHOI???€?s adaptive mission survey can sniff out and map out an oil plume. frequently The (potentially constantly) leaking wreck will hopefully serve as proxy. a real-world Data be will collected from the following sensors: Up/down 1200 ADCP (RDI) kHz SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck Seabird glider payload CTD with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic artificial radiation More specifically, data also includes and is gathered in the following SeaOWL manner: UV-A ???€? CHL, FDOM, backscatter and Optical CTD (OBS) ???€? Conductivity, Water and Temp, Depth Optode DO ???€? DO Concentration and DO Saturation Merged data streams calibrated to common sampling rate 1/second of All sensor data retrieved as a .csv AUV file (lat/lon/depth) Fluorometry products OBS as a function of FDOM, 3D OBS/FDOM, data 3D model Data transfer: Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time: Merged data stream ~15 minutes NOAA has coordinated and provided background information to WHOI to help the prepare group for plan and their mission. NESDIS has shared satellite imagery from the leaking source, which was also analyzed through ERMA to identify likely a location for the wreck. ORR has shared RULET background information, current ocean information, and helped with coordination between WHOI USCG and Sector Southeastern New England. USCG The be will the following and mission studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Ocean Prediction Center is providing detailed on-site specific offshore weather forecasts for the area. The mission is planned to commence on the morning of Jan 20. is It likely that the transit time for the LRAUV to arrive on will site be 3 approximately days. Then the LRAUV will on stay site for 7-10 days before returning to land. Daily operational briefs including staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are scheduled for the duration of the mission. Information and data gathered during the mission will be displayed ERMA in and updates will be in provided ResponseLink.
On July 10, 2017, the NOAA SSC was notified by the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information (NESDIS) of Service an anomaly on satellite images in Nantucket Sound that may be from oil sheen from one of several historic wrecks in the region. [SEP] Information from the LRAUV mission can be near seen real-time on a publicly accessible website. 1. Once on the click website, "Dash4" the tab. 2. the Click + button to select a vehicle. Click on the word to "polaris" access the log and data. 3. The "log" shows tab actions taken by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners. 4. Click on the "data" tab to see data that is being gathered and in the various formats it is being and displayed summarized. Some of this data is incorporated being and displayed in [SEP] ERMA. Data from this mission can be online retrieved https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ at [SEP] Information and situation updates can be viewed here on ERMA. [SEP] is Here additional information on WHOI's LRAUV program for under-ice oil spill detection. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute long-range (WHOI) autonomous underwater vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene at the Wreck 1487 site in the early hours of 24 Jan 2022. The site is approximately nm 70 south Nantucket. of The USCG assisted WHOI in launching the LRAUV to save transit time and battery power. After launch, several calibration tests were completed, and then took it a few days for the LRAUV to transit to the research site. Durign the trip, identified, WHOI was but able to isolate, and ground fault error that could have jeopardized potentially Once its mission. on the scene, LRAUV began grid pattern searches through area the looking to identify or "sniff out" hydrocarbons from the wreck site. leaking in Early the morning of 24 a Jan, NESDIS update from satellite Sentinel 1A identified an oil sheen NE of the The site. information was shared with WHOI who, in response, is moving the LRAUV the into area where the sheen identified. was WHOI live has that information is being shared through a website so the public can see mission information and data that is being gathered. Some of that is information being also posted, available, as on ERMA. Detailed information on accessing the WHOI website and mission data be will shared in a separate post. [SEP] Hole The Woods Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) sending is a Long Range Autonomous Underwater Vehicle designed (LRAUV) to detect potential oil on spills a test to run a known sunken vessel that is actively leaking. The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will travel to a known shipwreck labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south Nantucket, of to test the sensitivity of an optical sensor and then see how well WHOI???€?s adaptive mission survey can sniff out and map out an oil plume. The frequently (potentially constantly) leaking will wreck hopefully serve a as real-world proxy. Data will be collected from following the Up/down sensors: 1200 kHz (RDI) ADCP SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck Seabird glider payload CTD with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic radiation artificial More specifically, data also includes and is gathered in the following manner: SeaOWL UV-A ???€? CHL, and FDOM, Optical backscatter (OBS) CTD ???€? Conductivity, Water Temp, and Depth DO Optode ???€? DO Concentration and Saturation DO Merged data calibrated streams to sampling common rate of 1/second All sensor data a retrieved as .csv file (lat/lon/depth) AUV Fluorometry products OBS as function a of 3D FDOM, OBS/FDOM, 3D data model Data transfer: Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time: Merged data stream ~15 minutes NOAA has coordinated and provided information background WHOI to to help the group prepare for and plan their mission. NESDIS has shared satellite imagery from the source, leaking which was also analyzed ERMA through to identify a likely location for the wreck. ORR has shared RULET background information, ocean current information, and helped with coordination between WHOI and USCG Sector Southeastern New England. The USCG will be following the mission and studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Ocean Center Prediction is detailed providing specific offshore on-site weather for forecasts the area. The mission is planned to commence on the morning of Jan 20. It is likely that transit the time for the LRAUV to arrive on site will approximately be days. 3 Then the LRAUV will stay on site for 7-10 days before returning to land. Daily operational briefs including staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are scheduled for duration the of mission. the Information and data gathered during mission the will be displayed in and ERMA updates will be provided in ResponseLink.
On July 10, 2017, NOAA the was SSC notified by the National Environmental Satellite, and Data, Information Service (NESDIS) of an anomaly on images satellite in Nantucket Sound that may from be oil sheen from one of several historic wrecks the in region. [SEP] Information from the LRAUV mission can be seen near real-time a on publicly accessible website. Once 1. on the website, click the tab. "Dash4" 2. Click the + button to select a vehicle. Click on the word "polaris" to access the log and data. 3. The "log" tab shows actions taken by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners. on Click 4. "data" the to tab see data that being is gathered and in the various formats it is being displayed and Some summarized. of this data is being incorporated and displayed in ERMA. [SEP] Data from this mission can be retrieved online at https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ [SEP] Information and situation updates be can viewed here on ERMA. [SEP] is Here additional information on WHOI's LRAUV program for under-ice oil spill detection. [SEP] The Woods Hole Institute Oceanographic (WHOI) long-range autonomous underwater vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene at the Wreck site 1487 in the early hours of 24 Jan 2022. The site is approximately 70 nm south of Nantucket. The WHOI USCG assisted in launching the LRAUV to save transit time and battery power. After several launch, calibration tests were completed, and then it took a few days for the LRAUV to to transit the research site. Durign the WHOI trip, identified, but was to able and isolate, ground fault that error could have potentially jeopardized its mission. Once on scene, the LRAUV grid began pattern searches through the area looking to identify or "sniff out" hydrocarbons from the leaking wreck site. Early in of the 24 morning Jan, a NESDIS update from satellite Sentinel identified 1A an oil sheen NE of the site. The information was shared with WHOI who, response, in is moving the LRAUV into the area the where sheen was identified. WHOI has live information that being is shared through a website the so public see can mission information and data that is being gathered. Some of that information also is being posted, as available, on ERMA. Detailed information on accessing the WHOI website and mission data will be shared in a separate post. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) is sending a Long Range Autonomous Vehicle Underwater (LRAUV) designed to detect potential oil spills on a test run to a known vessel sunken that is actively leaking. The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will travel to a shipwreck known labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south of Nantucket, to test the sensitivity of an optical and sensor then see how well WHOI???€?s adaptive survey mission can sniff out and map out an oil plume. The frequently (potentially constantly) leaking wreck will hopefully serve as a real-world proxy. Data will collected be from the following sensors: Up/down 1200 kHz ADCP (RDI) SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck Seabird payload glider CTD with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor photosynthetic PAR, artificial radiation More specifically, data also includes and is gathered in the following manner: SeaOWL UV-A ???€? FDOM, CHL, and Optical backscatter (OBS) CTD ???€? Conductivity, Water Temp, Depth and DO Optode ???€? DO Concentration and DO Saturation Merged data calibrated streams to common rate sampling of 1/second All sensor data retrieved as a .csv (lat/lon/depth) file AUV Fluorometry products OBS as a function of 3D FDOM, OBS/FDOM, 3D data model Data transfer: Wifi when surfaced, stick memory time: Processing Merged data stream ~15 minutes NOAA has coordinated and provided background to information WHOI help to the group prepare for and plan their mission. NESDIS has satellite shared imagery leaking from the source, which was also analyzed through ERMA to identify a likely location for the ORR wreck. has shared RULET background information, ocean current and information, helped with between coordination and USCG WHOI Sector Southeastern New England. The USCG will be following the and mission studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Ocean Prediction Center is providing detailed specific on-site offshore weather forecasts for the area. The mission is planned to commence on the morning of Jan 20. It is likely that the transit time for the LRAUV to arrive site on be will approximately 3 days. Then the LRAUV will stay on site for 7-10 days before returning to land. Daily operational briefs including staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are scheduled for the duration of the mission. Information and data gathered during the will mission be displayed in ERMA and updates provided will in be ResponseLink.
On July 10, 2017, the NOAA SSC was notified by the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) of an anomaly on satellite images in Nantucket Sound that may be from oil sheen from one of several historic wrecks in the region. [SEP] Information from the LRAUV mission can be seen near real-time publicly on a accessible website. 1. Once on the website, click the "Dash4" tab. 2. Click + the to button select vehicle. a Click on the word "polaris" to the access log and data. The 3. tab "log" shows taken actions by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners. Click 4. on the "data" tab to see data that is being gathered and in the various it formats is being displayed and summarized. Some of data this is being incorporated and displayed in ERMA. [SEP] Data from this mission can be retrieved at online https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ [SEP] Information and situation updates can be viewed on here ERMA. Here [SEP] is additional information on WHOI's LRAUV program for under-ice oil [SEP] spill detection. The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) long-range autonomous underwater vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene at the Wreck 1487 site in early the hours of 24 2022. Jan The site is approximately nm 70 south of The Nantucket. USCG assisted WHOI in launching the LRAUV to save transit time and battery power. After launch, several calibration tests completed, were and then it took a few days for the LRAUV to transit to the research site. Durign the trip, WHOI identified, but was able to isolate, and ground fault error that could have potentially jeopardized its mission. Once on scene, the LRAUV began grid pattern searches through the area looking identify to or "sniff out" hydrocarbons from the leaking wreck site. Early in the morning of Jan, 24 NESDIS a update from satellite Sentinel 1A identified an oil sheen NE the of site. The was information shared with WHOI who, in response, is moving the LRAUV into the area where the sheen was identified. WHOI has live information that is being shared through a website so the public can see mission information and data that is being gathered. Some of that is information being also posted, as available, on ERMA. Detailed information on accessing the website WHOI and data mission will be shared in a separate post. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) is sending Long a Range Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (LRAUV) designed to detect potential oil spills on a test run to a known sunken tanker that is actively leaking. The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will to travel a known shipwreck labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south of Nantucket, test the to sensitivity of an optical sensor and then how see well adaptive WHOI???€?s mission survey can sniff out and map out an oil plume. The frequently (potentially constantly) leaking wreck will hopefully serve as a proxy. Data real-world will collected be the following from sensors: Up/down 1200 kHz ADCP (RDI) SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck Seabird glider CTD payload with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic artificial radiation More specifically, data includes also and is gathered in the following manner: UV-A SeaOWL ???€? CHL, FDOM, and Optical backscatter (OBS) CTD ???€? Conductivity, Water Temp, and Depth DO Optode ???€? DO Concentration and DO Merged Saturation data calibrated streams to common sampling rate of All sensor 1/second data retrieved as a .csv file (lat/lon/depth) AUV Fluorometry products OBS a as function of FDOM, 3D OBS/FDOM, 3D data Data model transfer: Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time: Merged data stream ~15 NOAA minutes has coordinated and provided information background to WHOI to help the group prepare for and their plan mission. NESDIS has shared satellite imagery from the leaking source, which was also analyzed through to ERMA identify a likely location for the wreck. ORR has shared RULET background ocean information, current information, and helped with coordination between WHOI and USCG Sector Southeastern New England. The USCG will be following the mission and studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Ocean Prediction Center is detailed providing specific on-site offshore weather forecasts for the area. The mission is planned to commence the on morning of Jan 20. It is likely that the time transit the for LRAUV to arrive site on will be approximately 3 Then days. the LRAUV will stay on site for 7-10 before days returning to land. Daily operational briefs including staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are scheduled for duration the of the mission. Information and data gathered during the mission will be displayed in ERMA and updates will be provided in ResponseLink.
On July 10, 2017, NOAA the SSC notified was by the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) of an anomaly on satellite images in Nantucket Sound that may crude be from sheen from one of several wrecks historic in the [SEP] region. Information from the LRAUV mission can be seen near real-time on a publicly accessible 1. website. Once on website, the click the "Dash4" 2. tab. Click the + button to select a vehicle. Click on the word "polaris" to access the log and data. 3. The "log" tab shows actions taken by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners. on Click 4. the "data" tab see to data that is being gathered the and in various it formats is being displayed and summarized. Some of this data is being incorporated and displayed in ERMA. [SEP] Data from this mission be can retrieved online at https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ [SEP] Information and situation updates be can viewed here on ERMA. [SEP] Here is additional information on WHOI's LRAUV program for under-ice discharge oil detection. [SEP] The Hole Woods Oceanographic long-range Institute (WHOI) autonomous underwater vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene Wreck at the 1487 site in the early hours of 24 Jan 2022. The site is 70 approximately south nm Nantucket. of The USCG assisted WHOI in launching the LRAUV to save transit time and battery power. After launch, several calibration tests were completed, and it then took a few days for the LRAUV to transit the to research site. Durign the trip, identified, WHOI but was to able isolate, and ground fault error that could potentially have jeopardized its mission. Once on scene, LRAUV the began grid searches pattern through the area looking to identify or "sniff out" hydrocarbons from the leaking wreck site. Early in the morning of 24 Jan, a NESDIS update from satellite Sentinel 1A identified an sheen oil NE of the site. The information was with shared who, WHOI in response, is moving the LRAUV into the area where the sheen was identified. WHOI has live information that is being shared through a so website the public can see mission information and data that is being gathered. Some of that information is also being as posted, available, on ERMA. Detailed information on accessing the WHOI website and mission data be will shared a in separate post. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) is sending a Long Range Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (LRAUV) designed to detect potential oil spills on a test to run a known sunken vessel that is actively leaking. The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will travel to a known shipwreck labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south of Nantucket, to test the sensitivity of an optical sensor and then see how well adaptive WHOI???€?s mission survey can sniff out and map out an oil plume. The frequently constantly) (potentially leaking wreck will hopefully serve a proxy. as real-world Data will be collected from the following sensors: Up/down kHz 1200 ADCP (RDI) Wetlabs SeaOWL ecopuck Seabird glider payload CTD with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic artificial radiation More specifically, data also includes and is gathered in following the manner: SeaOWL UV-A ???€? CHL, FDOM, and Optical backscatter (OBS) CTD ???€? Conductivity, Water Temp, and Depth DO ???€? Optode DO Concentration and DO Saturation Merged data calibrated streams to common rate sampling of 1/second All sensor data retrieved as a .csv file (lat/lon/depth) AUV Fluorometry products OBS as a function of FDOM, 3D OBS/FDOM, 3D data model Data transfer: Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time: Merged data stream ~15 minutes NOAA has coordinated and provided background information to WHOI to help the group prepare for and plan their mission. NESDIS has shared satellite imagery from the leaking source, which was also analyzed through ERMA to identify a likely location the for wreck. ORR has shared background RULET ocean information, current information, helped and with coordination between WHOI and USCG Sector Southeastern New England. The USCG will be following the mission and studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Prediction Ocean Center is providing detailed specific on-site weather offshore forecasts for area. the The mission is planned to commence on the morning of Jan It 20. is likely that the transit time for the LRAUV to arrive on site will be approximately 3 days. Then the LRAUV will stay on site for 7-10 before days returning to Daily land. including operational briefs staff NOAA from and ORR USCG are scheduled for the duration of the mission. Information and data gathered during the mission will be displayed ERMA in and updates will be provided in ResponseLink.
On 2017, July 10, the NOAA SSC was by notified the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) of an anomaly on satellite images in Nantucket Sound that may be from product sheen from one historic of several wrecks in the region. [SEP] Information from the LRAUV mission can be seen near real-time on a publicly accessible website. 1. Once on the website, click the "Dash4" tab. 2. Click the + button to select a vehicle. Click on the word "polaris" to access the log and data. 3. The "log" tab shows actions taken by WHOI LRAUV pilots and mission planners. 4. Click on "data" the tab to see data that is being gathered and in the various formats it is being displayed and summarized. Some of this data is being and incorporated displayed in ERMA. [SEP] Data from this mission can be retrieved online at https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ [SEP] Information and situation can updates be viewed on here ERMA. [SEP] Here is additional information on WHOI's LRAUV program under-ice for oil release detection. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) long-range autonomous underwater vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived at on-scene the Wreck 1487 site in the early hours of 24 Jan 2022. The site is approximately 70 nm south Nantucket. of The USCG assisted WHOI in launching the LRAUV to save transit time and battery power. After launch, several calibration tests were completed, and then took it a few days for LRAUV the transit to to the research site. Durign the trip, WHOI identified, but was to able isolate, and fault ground error that could have potentially jeopardized its mission. Once on scene, the LRAUV grid began pattern searches through the looking area to identify or out" "sniff hydrocarbons from wreck the leaking site. Early in of the morning 24 Jan, a NESDIS update from satellite Sentinel 1A identified an oil sheen NE of the site. The information was with shared WHOI in who, response, is moving the LRAUV the into area where the sheen was identified. WHOI has live information that is being shared through a so website the public can see mission information data and being that is gathered. Some of that information is also being posted, as available, on ERMA. Detailed information on accessing the WHOI website and mission data will be shared in a [SEP] post. separate The Hole Woods Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) is sending a Long Range Autonomous Vehicle Underwater (LRAUV) to designed detect potential oil spills a on test run to a sunken craft known that is actively leaking. The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will travel to a known shipwreck labeled ???€?Wreck1487???€?, approximately 70nm south Nantucket, of to test the sensitivity an of optical sensor and then see how well WHOI???€?s adaptive mission survey can sniff out and map out an oil The plume. frequently (potentially constantly) leaking wreck will hopefully serve as a real-world Data proxy. will be from collected the following sensors: Up/down 1200 kHz ADCP (RDI) SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck Seabird glider payload with CTD embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic artificial radiation More specifically, data also includes and is gathered in the following manner: SeaOWL UV-A ???€? CHL, and FDOM, Optical backscatter (OBS) CTD ???€? Conductivity, Water Temp, and Depth DO Optode ???€? DO Concentration and Saturation DO Merged data streams calibrated to common sampling rate of 1/second All sensor data retrieved a .csv as file (lat/lon/depth) Fluorometry AUV products OBS as function a of FDOM, OBS/FDOM, 3D 3D data model Data transfer: Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time: Merged data stream ~15 minutes NOAA has coordinated provided and background information to WHOI to help the group prepare for and plan mission. their NESDIS has shared satellite imagery from the source, leaking which was also analyzed through ERMA to identify a likely location for the ORR wreck. has shared RULET background information, current ocean information, and helped with coordination between WHOI USCG and Sector Southeastern New England. The USCG will be following the mission and studying the outcomes. NOAA???€?s Ocean Center Prediction is detailed providing specific offshore on-site for weather forecasts the area. The is mission planned to commence the on morning of 20. Jan It is likely that the transit time for the LRAUV to arrive on will site be approximately 3 days. Then the LRAUV will on stay site 7-10 for before days returning to land. Daily operational including briefs staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are scheduled for duration the of the mission. and Information data gathered during the mission will be displayed in ERMA and updates will be provided in ResponseLink.
On July 2017, 10, the NOAA SSC was notified by the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) of an on anomaly satellite images in Nantucket Sound that may be from oil sheen one from of several wrecks historic the in region. [SEP] Information from the LRAUV mission can be seen near real-time on a publicly accessible website. 1. Once on the website, click tab. the "Dash4" 2. Click the + button to select a vehicle. Click on the "polaris" word to access the log data. and 3. The "log" tab shows actions taken by WHOI pilots LRAUV and mission planners. 4. Click on the "data" tab to see data that being is gathered in and the various formats it is being displayed and summarized. Some of data this is being incorporated and displayed in ERMA. [SEP] Data from this mission can be online retrieved at https://lrauv.whoi.edu/TethysDash/data/polaris/missionlogs/2022/20220120_20220201/ [SEP] Information and situation updates can be viewed here on ERMA. [SEP] is Here additional information on WHOI's LRAUV program for under-ice oil spill detection. [SEP] The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) long-range underwater autonomous vehicle (LRAUV) "Polaris" arrived on-scene at the Wreck 1487 site in the early of hours 24 Jan 2022. The is site approximately 70 nm south of Nantucket. The USCG assisted WHOI in launching the LRAUV to save transit time and battery power. After launch, several calibration tests were then completed, and it took a for few the days to LRAUV transit to the research site. Durign the trip, identified, WHOI but was able to isolate, and ground fault error that could have potentially jeopardized its mission. Once scene, on the LRAUV began grid pattern searches through the area looking to or identify "sniff out" from hydrocarbons the leaking wreck site. Early in morning the 24 of Jan, a NESDIS update from satellite Sentinel 1A identified an oil sheen NE of the site. The information was shared with WHOI who, in response, is the moving LRAUV into the area where the sheen was identified. WHOI has live information that being is shared through a website so the public can see mission information and data is that being Some gathered. of that information is also being posted, as available, on ERMA. Detailed information on accessing the WHOI website and mission data will be shared in a separate post. [SEP] Woods The Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) is sending a Long Range Autonomous Underwater Vehicle designed (LRAUV) to detect oil spills potential on a test run to a known sunken ship that is actively leaking. The LRAUV, ???€?Polaris???€? will to travel a shipwreck known ???€?Wreck1487???€?, labeled approximately 70nm south of to Nantucket, test the sensitivity of an sensor optical and then see how well WHOI???€?s adaptive survey can mission sniff out and map out an oil plume. The frequently (potentially constantly) leaking wreck will hopefully serve as a real-world Data proxy. will be collected from the following sensors: Up/down 1200 kHz ADCP (RDI) SeaOWL Wetlabs ecopuck glider Seabird payload CTD with embedded dissolved oxygen probe Licor PAR, photosynthetic artificial radiation More specifically, data also includes and gathered is in the following manner: SeaOWL UV-A ???€? CHL, FDOM, and Optical backscatter (OBS) CTD ???€? Conductivity, Water Temp, and Depth DO Optode ???€? DO Concentration and Saturation DO Merged data streams calibrated common to sampling rate of 1/second All sensor data retrieved as a .csv (lat/lon/depth) file AUV Fluorometry products OBS as a function of FDOM, 3D OBS/FDOM, 3D data model Data transfer: Wifi when surfaced, memory stick Processing time: Merged data stream ~15 minutes NOAA has coordinated provided and background information to to WHOI help the group prepare for and plan their mission. NESDIS has shared satellite from imagery the leaking source, which was also analyzed through ERMA to a identify likely location for the wreck. ORR has shared RULET information, background ocean current information, and helped with coordination between WHOI and Sector USCG Southeastern New England. The USCG will be following the mission studying and the outcomes. Ocean NOAA???€?s Prediction Center is specific providing detailed offshore on-site for weather forecasts the area. The mission is planned to commence on the morning of Jan 20. It is likely that the transit time for the LRAUV to arrive on site will be 3 approximately days. Then the LRAUV will stay on site for 7-10 days before returning to land. operational Daily briefs including staff from NOAA ORR and USCG are scheduled for the duration of the mission. Information and data during gathered the mission will be displayed ERMA in and updates will be provided in ResponseLink.
On October 20, 1937, the tank barge Argo foundered in a and storm sank in western Erie. Lake At the time of the sinking, the barge was loaded reportedly with 4,762 barrels of crude oil and benzol. The vessel was identified in the 2013 NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Environmental Threats) report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the was wreck unknown. Recently the vessel was located, confirmed to be in U.S. waters of Lake Erie, and appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery to intact be and may be periodically leaking. [SEP] USCG announces completion of lightering [SEP] USCG [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering began operations today for the Lake Erie sunken tanker barge Unified Argo Command as responders took advantage of a favorable weather window. The first of Argo???€?s eight tanks are being tapped and offloaded. The product will be pumped into a container specialized on a work barge where it will be run through series a of carbon filters to separate and remove vapors flammable the from the product. The contents will again be to sampled a gain understanding better of the contents of Argo???€?s hold. This step-by-step, methodical process will ensure operations are conducted in safest the possible manner for both responders and the public. As weather allows, responders will continue salvage operations one tank at a time. The Command, Unified consisting of U.S. the Coast Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public and the environment. a If leak to were occur, response equipment and detailed plans created from the Contingency Area Plan and various experts involved in the response are in place to mitigate any possible threats. As additional an measure, precautionary the zone safety around barge the remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s at the location bottom of Erie. Lake No vessel may enter, transit through, or anchor within regulated the area without permission from the Coast patrol Guard commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions about the should response be directed to Joint the Center Information at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge Argo in Lake Erie continue as the Unified proceeds Command with plans for product recovery. Crews start will prepping the first tank this week ???€?hot for tapping???€? operations. Actual lightering operations will not occur until in later the week the at earliest, as the response operators are still waiting for the proper tank to offload the material into and continues weather impede to operations. results The from the sample from this first tank, sampled on November were 9, to found be primarily with Benzene, some Xylene Toluene, and trace elements of petroleum. Because these are materials typically not shipped on the Great Lakes, the proper equipment to remove it is not available in this Response region. operators are waiting for receiving tanks, designed for to chemicals, be modified for use on barge a in the Great Lakes marine environment. In the meantime, the safety zone around the barge remains at 1 a nautical radius mile directly the above barge???€?s location at bottom the Lake of Erie. vessel No enter, may transit through or anchor within the regulated area without from permission Coast the Guard patrol commander, Marblehead, Station which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. questions All about the response should be directed to the Joint Information Center 419-746-5424. at [SEP] news story on sinking [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Coast Marine Safety Guard Unit Toledo Contact: Ryan Lt. Junod Office: (419) 392-0323 UPDATE 3: Crews continue sunken response for Lake Erie barge - CLEVELAND Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance from the site of sunken a barge near Kelleys Island Shoal Lake in Erie Thursday. The unified command, consisting of the U.S. Guard Coast and the Ohio EPA, continues to take necessary all actions to ensure the safety of the public and the environment. During dive operations Wednesday, a pinhole-sized leak was detected one in of the cargo tanks and was secured successfully by the dive team. As a precautionary measure, on-scene responders were taken to a local hospital for medical evaluation and have since been released. Surface operations were suspended to ensure safety of all responders and resume will when site safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders to return. A Coast helicopter Guard from Air Station Detroit launched to provide an over-flight assessment of the area Thursday. Results from a sheen sample collected were returned and indicate the sample was typical of a light to medium refined oil that had significantly degraded over time. T&T Marine Salvage completed crews their assessment general of the barge Monday, with a total of 12 hatches Four discovered. of those hatches were not secured and the remaining eight hatches were closed with no leaks detected. Samples were taken from the sediment inside the compartments open and have sent been for testing. Due to the potential threat from any remaining cargo in the tanks with hatches, secured unified the command will continue assessing the site anticipation in removing of any remaining product. The Coast established Guard a safety zone, located 8 nautical miles east of Kelleys Island and extending 1,000 feet around position 41-38'21"N, 082-29'35"W, remains in effect and is closed to traffic all until canceled. No vessel may enter, through transit anchor or within regulated the area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, may which be contacted via VHF-FM 16. channel The Canadian Coast Guard is working closely the with Unified Command to ensure necessary preparedness and response both on sides of the international border. The Canadian Coast Guard deployed environmental response personnel to the Unified Command in Toledo, Ohio, to ensure every community remains up to date on the latest developments. Lives Saving and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] USCG USCG [SEP] Update - 9 Argo Response ends. [SEP] Source: USCG. see Please the attachment for a full description. [SEP] 2013 report. The barge location is reported to be 5 miles south of the reported position in this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
October On 20, 1937, the tank barge Argo foundered in a storm and sank western in Lake Erie. At the time of sinking, the the barge was reportedly loaded with 4,762 barrels of crude fuel and benzol. The vessel was identified in the 2013 NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Threats) Environmental report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the wreck was unknown. Recently the vessel was located, confirmed to in be U.S. waters of Erie, Lake appears and side-scan from survey imagery sonar to intact be and be may periodically [SEP] leaking. USCG announces of completion lightering [SEP] USCG [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering operations began today for the Lake Erie sunken tanker barge Argo as Command Unified responders took advantage a of favorable weather window. The first of Argo???€?s eight tanks are tapped being and offloaded. The product will be pumped into container a specialized on a work barge where it will run be through a series of carbon to filters separate and remove the flammable vapors the from product. The contents will again be sampled to gain a better understanding of the contents of Argo???€?s hold. This step-by-step, methodical process will ensure operations are conducted in the safest possible manner for both responders and public. As the weather allows, responders continue will salvage one operations tank at a time. The Unified Command, consisting of U.S. the Guard Coast and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary to actions ensure the of safety the public and environment. the If a spill were to occur, mitigation equipment and detailed plans created from the Area Contingency Plan and various experts involved in the response are in to place mitigate any threats. possible As an additional measure, precautionary the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s at location the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through, or anchor within the area regulated without permission from the Coast Guard patrol Station commander, Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions about response the should be directed to the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge Argo in Lake continue Erie as the Unified Command proceeds with plans for product recovery. Crews will start prepping the first tank this week for tapping???€? ???€?hot operations. Actual lightering operations will not occur later until in the week at the earliest, as the response operators are still waiting for the proper tank to offload the material into and continues weather impede to operations. results The from the sample from this first tank, sampled on November were 9, found to be primarily Benzene, with some Toluene, Xylene and trace elements of petroleum. Because materials these are not typically shipped on Great the Lakes, the equipment to remove proper it is not available in this region. Response operators are waiting receiving for tanks, designed for chemicals, to be modified for use on a in barge Great the Lakes marine environment. In the meantime, the safety zone around the remains barge at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location the at bottom of Lake Erie. vessel may No enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which be may contacted via VHF marine FM radio channel 16. All questions about the response should directed be to the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] news story on sinking [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Guard Coast Marine Safety Unit Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod 392-0323 Office: (419) UPDATE 3: Crews continue response sunken for Erie Lake barge CLEVELAND - Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance from the site of a sunken barge near Kelleys Island Shoal in Lake Erie Thursday. The unified command, consisting of the Coast U.S. Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure safety the of the public and environment. the During dive operations Wednesday, a pinhole-sized leak was detected in of one the cargo tanks and was secured successfully by the dive team. As a precautionary measure, on-scene responders were taken a to local hospital for medical evaluation and have since been released. Surface operations were suspended to ensure safety of responders and all will resume when site safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders to return. A Coast Guard helicopter Air from Station launched Detroit to provide an over-flight assessment of the area Thursday. Results from a sheen sample collected were returned and indicate the sample was typical of a light to medium refined oil that had significantly degraded over time. T&T Marine Salvage their crews completed general of assessment the barge Monday, with a total of 12 discovered. hatches Four of those were hatches not secured and the remaining hatches eight were closed with no leaks Samples detected. were taken from the sediment inside the compartments open and have been sent testing. Due for to potential the threat from any remaining cargo in the with tanks secured hatches, the unified command will continue assessing site the in anticipation of removing any remaining The product. Coast Guard established a safety located zone, 8 nautical miles of east Kelleys Island and extending 1,000 feet around position 41-38'21"N, 082-29'35"W, remains in effect and is closed to all traffic until canceled. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission the from Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF-FM channel 16. The Canadian Coast Guard is working closely with the Unified Command to ensure and necessary preparedness response on both sides of the border. international The Canadian Coast Guard deployed environmental response to the personnel Unified Command Ohio, Toledo, in to ensure every community remains up to date on the latest developments. Saving Lives and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG Update 9 - Argo Response ends. [SEP] Source: USCG. see Please the for attachment a full description. [SEP] 2013 report. The barge is location reported to be 5 miles south of the reported position in this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
On October 20, 1937, the tank barge Argo foundered in storm a and sank in western Lake Erie. At the of time sinking, the barge the was reportedly loaded with 4,762 barrels of crude fuel and benzol. The boat was identified in 2013 the NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Environmental Threats) report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of wreck the was unknown. Recently vessel the was located, confirmed to be in U.S. waters of Lake and Erie, appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery to intact be and may be leaking. periodically USCG [SEP] announces completion of [SEP] lightering USCG [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering operations began today for the Lake Erie sunken barge tanker Argo as Unified Command responders took advantage of a favorable weather window. The first of Argo???€?s tanks eight are being tapped and offloaded. The product will be pumped into a specialized container on a work barge where it will be run through a series of carbon filters to separate and remove the flammable vapors from the product. The contents will again be sampled to gain a better understanding of the of contents Argo???€?s hold. This step-by-step, methodical process will operations ensure are conducted in the possible safest manner for both responders and the As public. weather allows, responders will continue salvage operations one tank at a time. The Command, Unified consisting of the Coast U.S. Guard and Ohio the EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public and the If environment. a spill were to occur, and cleanup equipment detailed plans created from the Area Contingency Plan and various experts involved in the response in are place to possible mitigate any threats. As an additional precautionary measure, zone the safety around the barge remains at a 1 nautical directly mile radius above barge???€?s the location at the bottom of Lake Erie. vessel No may enter, transit through, or within regulated anchor the area without permission from the Guard Coast Station patrol commander, which Marblehead, be may contacted via VHF marine FM radio channel 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Joint Information at Center 419-746-5424. [SEP] Link: See http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge Argo in Lake Erie continue as the Unified Command proceeds with plans for product recovery. Crews will start prepping first the tank this for week ???€?hot tapping???€? operations. Actual lightering operations will not occur until later in the week the at earliest, as the response operators are waiting still for the proper tank to offload the material into and weather continues to impede The operations. results from the sample from this first tank, sampled on November 9, were found to be primarily Benzene, with some Toluene, Xylene and trace elements of petroleum. Because these materials are not typically shipped the on Great Lakes, the proper equipment to is remove it not in available this region. Response operators are waiting for receiving tanks, designed for chemicals, be to modified for use on a barge in Great the Lakes marine environment. In the meantime, the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 nautical radius mile directly above the barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No may vessel enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF marine FM radio channel 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] news on story sinking [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod Office: (419) UPDATE 3: 392-0323 continue Crews for response sunken Lake Erie barge CLEVELAND - Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance from the site of a sunken barge near Kelleys Island Shoal in Lake Erie Thursday. The unified command, consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and Ohio the EPA, continues take to all necessary actions to ensure the safety the of public and the environment. During dive operations Wednesday, a pinhole-sized leak was detected in one of the cargo and tanks was successfully secured by the dive team. As a precautionary on-scene measure, responders were taken to a local for hospital medical evaluation and have since released. been operations Surface were suspended to ensure safety of all responders and will resume when site safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders to return. A Coast Guard helicopter from Air Station Detroit launched to provide an over-flight assessment of the area Thursday. Results from sheen a sample collected were returned indicate and the was sample typical of a light to medium refined oil that had significantly over degraded T&T time. Marine Salvage crews completed their general assessment of the Monday, barge with a total of 12 hatches discovered. Four of those hatches were not secured the and remaining eight were hatches closed with no leaks detected. Samples were taken the from sediment inside the open and compartments been have sent for testing. Due to the potential threat from any remaining cargo in tanks the with secured hatches, the command unified will continue assessing the site in anticipation removing of any remaining product. The Coast Guard established a safety zone, located nautical 8 miles east of Kelleys Island and extending 1,000 feet around position 41-38'21"N, 082-29'35"W, in remains effect and is closed to traffic all until canceled. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Marblehead, Station which may be contacted via VHF-FM channel 16. The Canadian Coast Guard is working closely with the Unified Command to ensure necessary preparedness and response on both sides of the border. international The Canadian Coast deployed Guard environmental response personnel to the Unified Command in Toledo, Ohio, to every ensure community remains to up on date the latest developments. Saving Lives and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG Update 9 - Response Argo ends. [SEP] Source: USCG. Please see the attachment for a description. full [SEP] 2013 report. The barge location is reported be to 5 miles south of reported the position in this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
On 20, October 1937, the barge tank foundered Argo in a storm and sank in western Lake Erie. At the time of sinking, the the barge was reportedly loaded with 4,762 barrels of crude petroleum and benzol. The vessel was identified in the 2013 NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Threats) Environmental report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the wreck unknown. was the Recently vessel located, was confirmed to be in U.S. waters of Lake Erie, and appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery to be intact may and be periodically leaking. [SEP] announces USCG completion of lightering [SEP] [SEP] USCG http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND Lightering ???€? operations began today for the Lake Erie sunken barge tanker Argo as Unified Command responders took advantage of a favorable weather window. first The of Argo???€?s eight are tanks being tapped and offloaded. The product will be pumped into a specialized container on a work barge where it will run be through a of series carbon filters to separate and remove flammable the vapors from product. the The contents will again be sampled to gain a better understanding of the contents hold. of Argo???€?s This step-by-step, methodical process will operations ensure are conducted in safest the for possible manner both responders and the public. As weather allows, responders will continue salvage operations one tank at a time. The Unified Command, consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the of safety the public the and environment. If a sheen were to occur, response equipment detailed and plans created from the Area Contingency Plan and various experts in involved the response are in place to mitigate possible any As threats. an additional precautionary measure, the safety zone around the barge at remains a 1 nautical radius mile directly the above location barge???€?s at the bottom of Lake Erie. No may vessel enter, transit through, or anchor within the area regulated without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF marine FM radio channel 16. questions All about the response should be directed to the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge Argo in Erie Lake as continue Unified the Command proceeds with plans for product recovery. Crews will start prepping the first this tank week for ???€?hot tapping???€? operations. Actual lightering operations will not occur until later in the week at the earliest, as the response operators are still waiting the for proper tank to offload the material into and weather continues impede to The operations. results from the sample from this first sampled tank, November on 9, were found to be primarily Benzene, with some Toluene, Xylene and trace elements of petroleum. Because these materials are not typically shipped on the Great Lakes, the proper equipment to remove it is not available in this region. Response operators are waiting for receiving tanks, designed for chemicals, to be modified for use on a in barge the Great Lakes marine environment. In meantime, the the safety zone the around barge remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor within the area regulated without permission from the Coast Guard commander, patrol Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via FM VHF marine radio channel 16. questions All about the response should be directed to the Joint Information Center 419-746-5424. at [SEP] news story sinking on [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Coast Guard Marine Unit Safety Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod Office: (419) 392-0323 UPDATE 3: Crews continue response for sunken Lake Erie barge CLEVELAND - Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance from the site of a barge sunken near Kelleys Island Shoal in Lake Erie Thursday. The unified command, consisting the of U.S. Coast Guard and the Ohio EPA, to continues take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the and public environment. the During dive operations Wednesday, a pinhole-sized leak was detected in one of the cargo tanks and was successfully secured by dive the team. As a precautionary measure, on-scene responders were taken to a local hospital for evaluation medical and since have been released. Surface operations suspended were to ensure safety of all responders and will resume when site safety coordinators it determine is safe responders for to return. A Coast from Guard helicopter Air Station Detroit launched to provide an over-flight assessment of the area Thursday. Results from a sheen sample collected were and returned indicate the sample was of typical light a to medium refined oil that had significantly degraded over time. T&T Marine Salvage crews completed general assessment their of the Monday, with barge a total of hatches 12 discovered. Four those of hatches were not secured and the remaining eight hatches were closed with no leaks detected. were Samples taken from the inside sediment the open compartments have and been sent for testing. to Due the potential threat any from remaining cargo in the tanks with secured hatches, the unified command will continue assessing site the in of anticipation removing any remaining product. Guard The Coast established a safety zone, located 8 nautical miles east of Kelleys Island and extending 1,000 feet around 41-38'21"N, position 082-29'35"W, remains in effect and is closed to all traffic until canceled. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which be may contacted via VHF-FM channel 16. The Coast Canadian Guard is working closely with the Unified Command to ensure necessary preparedness and response on both sides the of international border. The Coast Canadian Guard deployed environmental response personnel to the Unified Command in Toledo, to Ohio, ensure every community remains up to date on the latest developments. Saving Lives and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. The United States Guard Coast -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] [SEP] USCG USCG Update 9 - Response Argo ends. [SEP] Source: USCG. Please see the attachment for a full description. [SEP] 2013 report. The barge location is reported to be 5 miles south of the reported position in this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
On October 20, 1937, the tank Argo barge foundered in a storm and sank in western Lake Erie. the At time of the sinking, the was barge reportedly loaded with 4,762 barrels of fuel crude and benzol. The craft was identified in the 2013 NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Environmental Threats) report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the wreck was unknown. Recently the vessel was located, confirmed to be in U.S. waters of Lake Erie, and appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery be to intact and may be periodically leaking. [SEP] USCG announces completion of lightering [SEP] [SEP] USCG http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering operations began today for the Lake Erie sunken tanker barge Argo Unified as Command responders took advantage of a favorable window. weather The first of Argo???€?s eight tanks are being tapped and offloaded. The product will be pumped a into specialized container on a work barge where it will be run through a series of carbon filters to separate and remove the flammable vapors the from product. The contents will again be sampled to gain a better of understanding contents the of Argo???€?s hold. step-by-step, This process methodical will operations ensure are conducted in the safest possible manner for both responders and the public. As weather allows, responders will salvage continue operations one tank at time. a The Unified Command, consisting of the U.S. Coast and Guard the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public and environment. the If a spill to were occur, containment equipment and detailed plans created from the Area Contingency Plan and various experts involved in the response are in place to mitigate any possible threats. As an additional precautionary measure, zone the safety around the barge remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through, or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which be may contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge Argo in Lake Erie as continue the Unified proceeds with Command plans for product recovery. Crews will start prepping the first tank week this ???€?hot for tapping???€? operations. Actual operations lightering will not occur until later in the at week the earliest, as the response operators are still for waiting the proper tank to offload the material and into weather to continues impede operations. The results from the sample from this first tank, sampled on November were 9, found be to primarily Benzene, with some Toluene, and Xylene trace of elements Because petroleum. these materials are not typically shipped on the Great Lakes, the proper equipment to remove it is not available in this region. Response operators are waiting for receiving tanks, designed for chemicals, to be modified for use on a barge in the Great marine Lakes environment. In the meantime, the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 mile nautical directly radius above the barge???€?s location the at bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without from permission the Coast Guard patrol Marblehead, commander, Station which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions the response about should be directed to the Joint Information 419-746-5424. at Center [SEP] news story on sinking [SEP] [SEP] USCG USCG News [SEP] Release November 05, 2015 Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Toledo Contact: Ryan Lt. Junod Office: (419) 392-0323 3: UPDATE Crews continue response for sunken Erie barge Lake CLEVELAND - Crews continue respond to to and investigate a reported discharge of unknown an substance the from site of a sunken near barge Kelleys Island Shoal in Lake Erie Thursday. The unified command, consisting of the Coast U.S. Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues take to all necessary actions to ensure safety the of public the and the environment. During dive operations Wednesday, a pinhole-sized leak was detected in one of the cargo tanks and was successfully by secured the team. dive As a precautionary measure, on-scene responders were taken to a local hospital medical for and evaluation have since been released. Surface operations were suspended to ensure safety all of and responders will resume when site safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders return. to Coast A Guard helicopter Air from Station Detroit launched to provide over-flight an assessment of the Thursday. area Results from a sheen sample collected returned were and indicate the sample typical was of a light to medium refined oil that had degraded significantly over time. T&T Marine Salvage crews completed their general assessment of the barge Monday, with a of total 12 hatches Four discovered. of those hatches were not secured the and remaining eight hatches were closed with no leaks detected. Samples were taken from the sediment inside the open compartments and have been sent for testing. Due to the threat potential from any remaining cargo in the with tanks secured hatches, the unified command will continue assessing the site in anticipation of removing remaining any product. The Guard Coast established a safety zone, located 8 nautical miles east Kelleys of Island and extending 1,000 feet around 082-29'35"W, position 41-38'21"N, remains effect in and is closed to all traffic canceled. until vessel No may enter, transit through or anchor within the regulated area without permission the from Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF-FM channel 16. The Canadian Coast Guard is working closely with the Unified Command to ensure necessary preparedness and response on both sides of the international The border. Canadian Coast Guard deployed environmental response personnel to the Unified Command in Toledo, Ohio, to ensure every community remains up to date on the latest developments. Saving Lives and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. United The States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG Update 9 - Response Argo ends. [SEP] USCG. Source: Please see the attachment for a full description. [SEP] 2013 report. The location barge is reported to be 5 south miles of the reported position in this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
On October 20, 1937, tank barge the foundered Argo in a storm and in sank western Erie. Lake At the of time the sinking, the barge reportedly was loaded with 4,762 barrels of product crude and benzol. The tanker was identified in the 2013 NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Environmental Threats) report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the wreck was unknown. Recently the vessel was located, confirmed to be in U.S. waters of Lake Erie, and appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery to intact be and may be periodically leaking. [SEP] USCG announces completion of lightering [SEP] USCG [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering operations began today for the Erie Lake sunken tanker Argo barge as Unified Command responders took advantage of a weather favorable window. The first of Argo???€?s eight tanks are being tapped and offloaded. The product will be pumped into a specialized container on a work barge where it will be run through a series of carbon filters separate to and remove the flammable vapors from the product. The contents will again be sampled to gain a better understanding of the contents Argo???€?s of hold. This step-by-step, methodical process will ensure operations are conducted in safest the possible manner for both responders and public. the As weather allows, responders will continue salvage operations one tank at a time. The Unified Command, consisting the of U.S. Coast Guard and the EPA, Ohio continues take to all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public and environment. the If a discharge occur, were to response equipment detailed and plans from created the Area Contingency Plan and various experts involved in the response are in to place mitigate any possible As threats. an additional precautionary measure, the safety zone around the remains barge at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through, or within anchor the regulated without area permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Marblehead, Station which may contacted be via VHF FM marine radio channel All 16. questions about the response should be directed to Joint the Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? operations Salvage for sunken the tanker Argo barge in Erie Lake continue as the Unified Command proceeds with plans for product recovery. will Crews start prepping the first tank this week for ???€?hot tapping???€? operations. Actual lightering operations will not occur until later in the week earliest, at as the the operators response are waiting still for the proper tank offload to the material into and continues weather to impede operations. The results from sample the from this first tank, on sampled November 9, were found to be primarily Benzene, with some Toluene, Xylene and trace elements of petroleum. Because these materials are not typically shipped on the Lakes, Great the equipment proper to remove it is not available in this region. Response are operators waiting for receiving tanks, for designed chemicals, to be modified for use on a barge in the Lakes Great marine environment. In the meantime, the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 nautical radius mile directly above the barge???€?s location at the of bottom Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through or anchor the within regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions about the response be should directed the to Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] news on story sinking [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Coast Marine Safety Guard Unit Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod (419) Office: 392-0323 UPDATE 3: Crews continue response for sunken Lake Erie barge CLEVELAND - Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of unknown an substance from the site of sunken a near barge Kelleys Island Shoal in Lake Erie Thursday. The unified command, consisting of the U.S. Coast and Guard the Ohio EPA, continues to take necessary all actions to ensure the safety of the public the and environment. During operations dive Wednesday, a leak pinhole-sized was detected in one of the cargo tanks and was successfully secured by the dive team. As a precautionary measure, on-scene responders taken were to a local hospital medical for evaluation and since have been released. Surface operations were suspended ensure to safety of all and will responders resume when site safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders return. to A Guard Coast helicopter from Air Station Detroit launched provide to over-flight an assessment of the area Results Thursday. from a sample sheen collected were returned and indicate the sample was typical of a light to refined medium oil that had significantly degraded over time. T&T Marine Salvage crews completed their general assessment of the barge Monday, with a total of 12 hatches discovered. Four of those hatches were not secured and the remaining eight hatches were closed with no leaks detected. Samples were taken from the sediment inside the open compartments and have been sent for testing. Due to the potential threat from any remaining cargo in the tanks with secured the hatches, unified command will continue assessing the site anticipation in of removing any remaining product. The Coast Guard a established safety located zone, 8 nautical miles of east Kelleys Island and extending 1,000 feet around position 41-38'21"N, 082-29'35"W, remains in effect and is closed to all traffic until canceled. No enter, vessel may transit through or anchor within the regulated area permission without the from Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted VHF-FM via channel 16. The Canadian Coast Guard is working closely the with Unified Command to ensure necessary and preparedness response on both sides of the international border. The Coast Canadian deployed Guard environmental response personnel to the Unified Command in Toledo, Ohio, ensure to every community remains up date to on the latest developments. Saving Lives and the Guarding Coast Since 1790. The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Future. Powerful [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG Update 9 - Response Argo ends. [SEP] Source: USCG. Please see the attachment for a full description. [SEP] 2013 report. The barge location is reported to be 5 miles south of the reported in position this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
On October 20, 1937, tank the Argo barge foundered in storm a and sank in western Lake Erie. At the time of the sinking, the barge reportedly was loaded with 4,762 barrels of crude oil and benzol. The tanker identified was in the 2013 NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Environmental Threats) report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the wreck was unknown. Recently the vessel was located, confirmed to be in U.S. of waters Erie, Lake and appears from side-scan sonar imagery survey to be and intact be may periodically leaking. USCG [SEP] announces completion of [SEP] lightering USCG [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering operations began today for the Lake Erie sunken tanker barge Argo as Unified responders Command took advantage of a favorable weather window. first The Argo???€?s of eight tanks are being tapped and offloaded. The product be will pumped into a specialized on container a barge work where it will be run a through series of carbon filters to separate and remove the flammable vapors from the product. contents The again be will sampled to gain a better understanding the contents of of Argo???€?s hold. This step-by-step, methodical ensure process will operations are conducted in the safest possible manner for both responders and the As public. weather allows, responders will continue operations salvage one tank at a time. The Unified Command, consisting the of Coast U.S. Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all actions necessary to ensure the safety of the public and environment. the If spill a were to occur, response equipment and detailed plans created from the Area Contingency and Plan various experts involved in the response are in place to mitigate any possible threats. As an additional precautionary measure, the safety zone around the barge remains at 1 a nautical mile radius directly above barge???€?s the location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through, or anchor within area regulated the without permission the from Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via FM VHF marine radio channel 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge Argo Lake in Erie continue as the Unified Command proceeds with plans product for recovery. Crews will start prepping the first tank this week for ???€?hot tapping???€? operations. lightering Actual operations will not occur until later in the week at the earliest, as the response operators are still waiting for the proper tank to offload the material into and weather continues to impede operations. The results from the sample from this first tank, sampled on 9, November were found to be primarily Benzene, with some Toluene, Xylene and trace elements of petroleum. Because materials these are not typically shipped on the Great Lakes, the proper equipment to remove it is not in available this region. Response operators are waiting for receiving tanks, designed for chemicals, be to modified for use on a barge in the Great Lakes marine the environment. In meantime, the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly the above barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel enter, may transit through or anchor the within regulated area without from permission the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station which Marblehead, may be contacted via VHF marine FM channel radio 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Information Joint at Center 419-746-5424. [SEP] news story on sinking [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod Office: (419) 392-0323 3: UPDATE Crews continue response for sunken Lake Erie barge - CLEVELAND Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance from the of site a sunken barge near Kelleys Island Shoal Lake in Erie Thursday. The unified command, consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public the and environment. During dive Wednesday, operations a pinhole-sized leak was in detected one of the tanks cargo and was successfully secured by the dive team. As a precautionary measure, responders on-scene were taken to a local hospital for medical evaluation and have since been released. operations Surface were suspended to ensure of safety all and responders will resume site when safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders to return. Coast A Guard helicopter from Air Station Detroit launched to provide an over-flight assessment of the area Thursday. Results from a sheen sample returned were collected and indicate the sample was of typical a light to medium refined oil that had degraded significantly over time. Marine T&T Salvage crews completed their general assessment of the barge Monday, with a of total 12 hatches discovered. Four of those hatches were not secured and the remaining eight hatches were closed no with detected. leaks Samples were from taken the sediment inside open the compartments and have been sent for testing. Due to the potential threat from any remaining cargo in the tanks with secured hatches, the unified command will continue assessing the site in anticipation of removing any remaining product. Coast The Guard established a safety zone, located 8 miles nautical east of Kelleys Island and 1,000 extending feet around position 41-38'21"N, remains 082-29'35"W, in effect and is closed to all traffic until canceled. vessel No may enter, transit or through anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via channel VHF-FM The 16. Canadian Coast Guard is working closely with the Unified Command to ensure necessary preparedness and response on both sides of the international border. The Canadian Coast Guard deployed environmental response personnel to the Unified Command in Toledo, Ohio, to ensure community every remains up to date on the latest developments. Lives Saving and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. United The States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG Update 9 - Argo Response [SEP] ends. Source: USCG. Please see the attachment for a full description. [SEP] 2013 report. The barge location is reported to be 5 miles south of the reported position in report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf this
On October 20, 1937, the tank barge Argo foundered a in storm sank and in western Lake Erie. At the time of the sinking, the barge was reportedly loaded with 4,762 barrels of crude oil and benzol. The ship was in identified the 2013 NOAA (Remediation RULET of Underwater Legacy Environmental Threats) report and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of wreck the unknown. was Recently the vessel was located, confirmed to be U.S. in waters of Lake Erie, and appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery to be intact and may be periodically leaking. [SEP] USCG announces of completion lightering [SEP] USCG [SEP] http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# ???€? CLEVELAND Lightering operations began today for the Erie Lake sunken tanker barge Argo as Unified Command responders took advantage of a favorable weather window. The first of Argo???€?s tanks eight being tapped are and offloaded. The product will be pumped into a specialized container on a work barge where it will be run through a series of carbon filters to separate and remove the flammable vapors from the product. The will contents again be sampled to gain a better understanding of the contents Argo???€?s of hold. This step-by-step, methodical process will ensure operations conducted are in the safest possible for manner both responders and the public. As weather allows, responders will continue salvage operations one tank at a time. The Unified Command, consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard the and Ohio continues EPA, to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public and the environment. If a spill were to occur, response equipment and detailed plans created from the Area Contingency Plan and various involved experts in the response are place in to mitigate any possible threats. As an additional precautionary measure, the safety zone around the barge remains at a 1 nautical mile radius directly above barge???€?s the location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through, or anchor within the regulated area without from permission Coast the Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted FM via VHF marine radio channel All 16. about the questions response should be directed to the Joint Information at Center 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge in Argo Lake continue Erie as the Unified Command proceeds with plans for product recovery. Crews start will prepping the first tank week this for ???€?hot tapping???€? operations. Actual lightering operations will not occur until later in the week the at earliest, as the response operators are still waiting for the proper tank to offload the material into and weather continues to impede operations. results The the from sample from this first tank, sampled on 9, November were to found primarily be Benzene, with some Xylene Toluene, elements and trace of petroleum. Because these are materials not typically shipped on the Great Lakes, the proper to equipment remove it is not available this in region. Response operators waiting are for receiving tanks, designed for chemicals, to be modified use for on a barge in the Great Lakes environment. marine In the meantime, the zone safety around the remains barge a at nautical 1 mile radius directly above the barge???€?s location at bottom the of Lake No Erie. vessel may transit enter, through or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Marblehead, Station which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Information Joint at Center 419-746-5424. [SEP] story news on [SEP] sinking USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod Office: (419) 392-0323 UPDATE 3: Crews continue response for sunken Erie Lake barge CLEVELAND - Crews continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance from the site a of sunken barge near Kelleys Island Shoal Erie in Lake Thursday. The unified command, consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and the continues Ohio EPA, take to all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the and public the environment. During dive operations Wednesday, pinhole-sized a leak was detected in one of the cargo tanks and was secured successfully by dive the team. As a precautionary measure, on-scene responders were taken to local a hospital for medical evaluation and since have been released. Surface operations were suspended to ensure safety of all responders and will resume site when safety coordinators it determine is for safe responders to return. Coast A Guard helicopter from Air Station launched Detroit to provide an over-flight assessment of the area Results Thursday. from a sample sheen collected were returned and indicate sample the was typical of a light to medium refined oil that had significantly degraded over time. T&T Marine Salvage crews completed general their assessment of the barge Monday, with a total of 12 hatches discovered. Four of those hatches were not secured and remaining the eight hatches were closed with leaks no detected. Samples were taken from the sediment inside the open compartments and have been sent for testing. Due to the potential threat from any remaining cargo in the tanks with secured hatches, the unified command will continue assessing the site in anticipation of removing any remaining product. The Coast Guard established a safety zone, located 8 nautical miles east of Kelleys Island and extending 1,000 feet around position 41-38'21"N, 082-29'35"W, remains in effect and is closed to all until traffic canceled. No vessel may transit enter, through or anchor within the regulated area without permission the from Coast patrol Guard commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF-FM channel 16. The Canadian Coast Guard working is closely with the Unified Command to ensure necessary preparedness response and on both sides of the international border. The Canadian Coast Guard deployed environmental response personnel to the Unified Command Ohio, in Toledo, to ensure every community remains up to date on the latest developments. Saving Lives and Guarding the Coast Since 1790. The United States Guard Coast -- Proud History. Powerful Future. [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG Update 9 - Argo Response ends. [SEP] Source: USCG. Please see the attachment a for full description. [SEP] report. 2013 The barge location is to reported be 5 miles south of the position reported in this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
On October 20, 1937, the barge tank Argo in foundered a storm and sank in western Lake Erie. At the time of sinking, the the barge was reportedly loaded with 4,762 of barrels fuel crude and benzol. The boat was identified in 2013 the NOAA RULET (Remediation of Underwater Legacy Environmental report Threats) and database as potential pollution threat, but the exact location of the wreck was unknown. Recently the was vessel located, confirmed to be U.S. in waters of Lake Erie, and appears from side-scan sonar survey imagery to be intact and may be leaking. periodically [SEP] USCG announces completion of lightering [SEP] [SEP] USCG http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2695002/# CLEVELAND ???€? Lightering operations began today for the Erie Lake sunken tanker barge Argo as Unified Command responders took advantage of a favorable weather window. The first of Argo???€?s eight tanks are being tapped and offloaded. product The will be pumped into a specialized container on a work barge where it will be run through a series of carbon filters to separate and remove the flammable vapors from the product. The contents again will be sampled gain to a better understanding of contents the of Argo???€?s hold. This step-by-step, methodical process will ensure are operations the conducted in safest possible manner both for responders and the public. As weather allows, responders will continue salvage operations one tank at time. a The Command, Unified consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and the EPA, Ohio continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of the public and the environment. If a were release to occur, remediation equipment and detailed plans created from the Area Plan Contingency and various experts involved in the response are in place to mitigate any possible threats. As precautionary an additional measure, the safety zone around barge the remains at a 1 radius mile nautical directly above the barge???€?s location at bottom the of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through, or anchor within the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel 16. All questions about the response should be directed to the Information Joint Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] See Link: http://www.uscgnews.com/go/doc/4007/2637614/ CLEVELAND ???€? Salvage operations for the sunken tanker barge in Argo Lake Erie continue as the Unified Command proceeds with for plans product Crews recovery. will start prepping the first tank this for week tapping???€? ???€?hot operations. Actual lightering operations will not occur until later the in week at the earliest, as the response operators are still waiting for the proper tank to offload material the into and weather continues to impede operations. results The from the sample from this first tank, sampled on November 9, were found to be primarily Benzene, with some Xylene Toluene, and trace elements of Because petroleum. materials these are not typically shipped on the Great Lakes, the proper equipment to remove it is not in available this Response region. operators are waiting for receiving tanks, designed for chemicals, to be modified for use on a barge the in Great Lakes marine environment. In the meantime, the safety zone the around barge remains at a nautical 1 mile radius directly the above barge???€?s location at the bottom of Lake Erie. No vessel may enter, transit through or within anchor the regulated area without permission from the Coast Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF FM marine radio channel All 16. questions about the should response be to directed the Joint Information Center at 419-746-5424. [SEP] news story on sinking [SEP] USCG [SEP] USCG [SEP] News Release November 05, 2015 Guard Coast Marine Safety Unit Toledo Contact: Lt. Ryan Junod Office: (419) 392-0323 UPDATE 3: Crews continue response for sunken Lake Erie barge CLEVELAND Crews - continue to respond to and investigate a reported discharge of an unknown substance the from site of a sunken barge Kelleys near Island Shoal in Lake Erie Thursday. The command, unified consisting of the U.S. Coast Guard and the Ohio EPA, continues to take all necessary actions to ensure the safety of public the the and environment. dive During operations a Wednesday, pinhole-sized leak was detected one in of the cargo was tanks and successfully secured by the dive As team. a precautionary on-scene measure, responders were taken to a local hospital for medical evaluation and have since been released. Surface operations were suspended to ensure safety of all responders will and resume when site safety coordinators determine it is safe for responders to return. A Coast Guard helicopter from Air Station Detroit launched to provide an over-flight assessment of the area Thursday. Results from a sheen sample collected were returned and indicate the sample was typical of a light to medium refined that oil had significantly degraded over time. Marine T&T Salvage crews their completed general assessment of barge Monday, the with a total of 12 hatches discovered. Four of those hatches secured were not and the remaining eight hatches were closed with no leaks detected. Samples were taken the from sediment inside the open compartments and have been sent for testing. Due to the potential threat from any remaining cargo in the tanks secured with hatches, the unified command will continue assessing the site in anticipation of removing any remaining product. Coast The Guard established a safety zone, located 8 nautical miles east of Kelleys Island and extending 1,000 feet around position 41-38'21"N, 082-29'35"W, remains in effect and is closed all to traffic until canceled. No vessel may enter, transit or through anchor within the regulated area without permission from Coast the Guard patrol commander, Station Marblehead, which may be contacted via VHF-FM channel 16. The Canadian Coast Guard is working closely with the Command Unified to ensure preparedness necessary and response on both sides of the international The border. Canadian Coast Guard deployed environmental response personnel to the Unified in Command Toledo, Ohio, to ensure every remains community up to date on the latest developments. Saving Lives Guarding and the Coast Since 1790. The United States Coast Guard -- Proud History. Powerful Future. USCG [SEP] [SEP] USCG Update 9 - Argo Response ends. [SEP] USCG. Source: Please see the attachment for a full description. 2013 [SEP] report. The barge location reported is to be 5 miles south of the reported position in this report. http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/protect/ppw/pdfs/argo.pdf
On October 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a recreational diver came to the surface covered with after oil diving on the British tanker SS Coimbra, which was torpedoed during WWII (located approximately 20 miles south of Shinnecock Inlet, Long Island, NY in about 150 feet of water). Divers have reported sheens from coming the Coimbra for decades, but the article suggests that the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Ed NOAA Levine, SSC the region, for to discuss the situation. It is expected that an interagency conference call be will held this to week determine whether an to investigation evaluate response options, is warranted. At the national level, ERD is developing an interagency agreement with the USCG under which the agencies will work together to address threats from vessels sunken off US shores that contain significant volumes of oil. The recent news is article available at this link: http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA New Detachment York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment of Tanker NEW Coimbra HAVEN, CT ???€? The U. S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine to conduct an underwater assessment of the tanker Coimbra, from June 19th ???€? 27th. approximately Located 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y., Coimbra the was sunk during World War II by a German U-boat. The operation will assess the condition of tanker the and potential to have an environmental impact. During the assessment, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Strike Atlantic Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, New and York of Department Conservation Environmental to provide consultation this for assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Coast Sector Sector Guard Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will determine help any potential environmental the threat poses. tanker Our priorities top are safety of the and public of the protection environment.???€? marine EDITOR'S NOTE: For more information regarding the Coimbra operation, please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan 203-468-4433 at or by mail at Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. [SEP] -USCG- 12300 Chart [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York (212) Office: 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 Detachment PA New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment, possible oil removal operations on Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? U.S. Coast The has Guard Resolve contracted Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil wreck from the in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The operation is scheduled take to place from April 28th to May The 30th. initial evaluation will assess the condition of the tanker and what potential environmental impact still exists. Based on the assessment, possible oil removal operations will take place. During the operation, are boaters requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, New York Department of Environmental Conservation, Coast Guard District One Response Advisory Team, Navy Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Coast Guard Headquarters Office of Environmental Management, and Guard Coast Salvage Engineering Response Team provide to consultation for assessment,???€? this said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine, and possibly remove any potential environmental the threat tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public protection and of the marine environment.???€? The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by German a U-boat. media interested For in the operation, contact please Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy at 212-514-4292, or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? Two samples pulled oils the from wreck of tanker the Coimbra are prepared to be sent out for testing after being retrieved from one of the tanks, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Guard Coast has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still and remains, if feasible, the Coast will Guard work with Resolve Marine Group remove to oil from the wreck in order to pollution reduce risks to environment. the The Coimbra, British-flagged a supply ship, sunk off the coast of Island Long in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Warrant Chief Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) Photos [SEP] from U.S. Coast Guard District 1 PADET New York Guard Coast crewmembers work alongside York New State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Long Sector Island Sound) Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State of Department Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine to Group help the assess condition of the wreck Coimbra on April 2019. The 30, Coimbra was a supply ship owned Great by Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast Long of Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) [SEP] Taken by Falcon USCG aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA New Detachment York Sector Contact: Long Island Sound Public Affairs Officer Office: (203) 468-4433 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 Detachment PA New York online Coast newsroom Guard postpones underwater assessment of Coimbra tanker NEW Conn. HAVEN, ???€? U.S. The Coast Guard postponed an underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra till the spring of 2019. The early start of the 2018 season and hurricane of activity hurricane Chris impacted logistics and raised safety concerns for the operation. ???€?The safety of our personnel is of one our highest concerns any in mission we conduct,???€? said Kevin Capt. Reed, commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We are scheduled to resume our joint efforts with the Navy Supervisor Salvage, of the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, Coast the Atlantic Guard Strike Team, Oceanic National and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department Environmental of in Conservation the spring of 2019.???€? For more information regarding the underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at 468-4433. (203) -USCG- [SEP] by Taken USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED 650X10 A YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A piece of the tanker Coimbra salvaged from 180 feet of water, on rests the deck of the Shelia Bordelon two while members crew label oil samples for testing, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast has Guard contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining the on Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles of southeast Shinnecock, If N.Y. oil substantial still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work Resolve with Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution to risks the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German it. U-boat torpedoed (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. [SEP] Conroy) ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety officer monitors a diver inside one of the two hyperbaric chambers on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon, 16, May After 2019. on diving the tanker Coimbra wreck 180 feet the below surface, they must spend two hours decompressing safely in hyperbaric the chamber. The Coast U.S. Guard has contracted Resolve Group Marine to a conduct full assessment of oil remaining on the wreck, Coimbra located approximately miles 30 southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, Coast the Guard will with work Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, British-flagged a supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in 1942 January when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast photo Chief by Guard Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District Detachment New PA York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment
On October 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a recreational came diver to the surface covered with fuel after diving on the British tanker SS Coimbra, which was torpedoed during WWII (located approximately 20 miles south of Shinnecock Inlet, Island, Long NY in about 150 feet of water). Divers have reported coming sheens from the Coimbra for decades, but the article suggests that the may leakage be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Ed NOAA SSC Levine, for the to region, discuss the It situation. expected is that an interagency conference call be will this held week to determine whether an investigation evaluate to mitigation options, warranted. is At the level, national ERD is developing an interagency agreement with the USCG under which the agencies will work together to address threats from vessels sunken US off shores that significant contain volumes of oil. The news article recent is at available this link: http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA New Detachment York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment York New online newsroom Coast Guard underwater to conduct of assessment Tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, CT ???€? The S. U. Coast Guard contracted has Resolve Marine to conduct an underwater assessment of the tanker Coimbra, from 19th June ???€? Located 27th. approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y., Coimbra the was sunk during World War by II a German U-boat. The operation will assess the condition of the tanker and potential to an have environmental impact. During the boaters assessment, are requested to keep a safe distance of yards 500 from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a members team including of the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Team, Strike National and Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation to provide for this consultation said assessment,???€? Capt. Kevin commander Reed, Sector Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine any potential environmental threat tanker poses. the Our top priorities are safety of the public and protection of the marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For more information regarding the Coimbra operation, please contact Lt. Alaina at Fagan 203-468-4433 or by mail at -USCG- Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. Chart [SEP] 12300 [SEP] News U.S. Release Coast Guard 1st Detachment District PA New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment, possible oil removal operations on Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? U.S. The Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine to Group conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine to Group remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The operation is scheduled to take place from 28th April May to The 30th. initial evaluation will assess the condition of the tanker and what potential environmental impact still exists. Based on the assessment, possible oil removal operations will take place. During the operation, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance 500 of yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a including team members of the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, New York of Department Environmental Conservation, Coast District Guard One Response Advisory Team, Navy Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, Oceanic National and Atmospheric Coast Headquarters Administration, Guard Office of Environmental Management, and Coast Guard Salvage Engineering Response Team provide to consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help and determine, possibly remove any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public and protection of the marine environment.???€? The Coimbra a was supply ship owned by Great Britain the when ship was off sunk the coast of Long Island, during World II War by a German U-boat. For media in the operation, interested please Chief contact Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy at 212-514-4292, or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? Two oils samples pulled from the wreck of the tanker Coimbra are prepared be to sent out for testing after being from retrieved of one the tanks, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of N.Y. Shinnecock, If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when German a U-boat torpedoed it. Coast (U.S. Guard photo by Chief Officer Warrant Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] Photos U.S. from Coast Guard District 1 York PADET New Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Island, Long during World II War by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New State York Department Environmental of Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition the of Coimbra wreck on 30, April 2019. Coimbra The was a supply owned ship Great Britain by when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a (U.S. German U-boat. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Island Long Sound) Taken [SEP] by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment York New Contact: Sector Long Island Sound Public Affairs Officer Office: (203) 468-4433 Hours: After (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online Coast newsroom Guard postpones underwater assessment of tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The Coast U.S. Guard postponed an underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra till the spring of 2019. early The start of the 2018 hurricane season and activity of hurricane Chris impacted logistics and raised concerns safety for the operation. ???€?The safety of our personnel is one of our highest concerns in any mission we conduct,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. are ???€?We scheduled to our resume joint efforts with the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New Department York of Environmental in Conservation spring the 2019.???€? of For more information regarding the underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at (203) 468-4433. -USCG- Taken [SEP] by Falcon USCG aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED 650X10 A YARD AREA PATCHY LIGHT OF SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH THE OF VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A piece of the tanker Coimbra salvaged from 180 feet of water, rests on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon while two crew members label oil samples for testing, May 2019. 16, The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine to Group conduct full a of assessment oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will with work Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order reduce to pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off coast the of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety officer monitors a diver inside one of two the hyperbaric chambers on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon, May 2019. After 16, diving on the tanker Coimbra wreck 180 feet below the surface, they must spend two hours safely decompressing in the chamber. hyperbaric The U.S. Coast has Guard contracted Marine Resolve Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on Coimbra the wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if the feasible, Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks the to environment. Coimbra, a The British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. Coast (U.S. Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast 1st Guard District PA Detachment New York Coast Contact: Guard PA Detachment New Office: (212) York 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment
On October 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a diver recreational came to surface the covered with crude after diving on the British tanker SS Coimbra, which was torpedoed during WWII (located approximately 20 miles south of Shinnecock Inlet, Long Island, NY in about 150 feet of water). Divers have reported sheens coming from the Coimbra for decades, the but article suggests that the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Levine, Ed NOAA SSC for the region, discuss to the situation. It is expected an that interagency conference call will be held this week to determine whether an investigation to evaluate response options, is warranted. At the level, national ERD is developing an interagency agreement with the USCG under which the agencies will work together to address threats vessels from sunken off US shores that contain significant of volumes oil. The news recent article available is this at link: http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release Coast U.S. Guard 1st District PA Detachment New Contact: York Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 Hours: After (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast to conduct Guard underwater assessment of Tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, CT ???€? The U. S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine to conduct an underwater assessment of the tanker Coimbra, from June 19th ???€? 27th. Located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y., the Coimbra was sunk during World War by a II U-boat. German The will operation assess the condition of the tanker and potential to have an environmental impact. the During assessment, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. assembled ???€?We have a team including members of the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New Department York of Environmental Conservation to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Sector Guard Coast Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine any potential environmental threat the poses. tanker Our top are priorities safety of the public protection of and the marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For more information regarding the Coimbra please operation, contact Lt. Alaina at Fagan 203-468-4433 or by mail at Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] Chart 12300 [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment York New Contact: Coast Guard New PA Detachment Office: York (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New online York newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment, possible oil removal on operations NEW Coimbra HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra located wreck, 30 approximately miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial still oil remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The operation is scheduled to take place from April 28th to May 30th. initial The evaluation will assess the condition of the and tanker what potential environmental impact exists. still Based on the assessment, possible oil removal operations will take place. the During operation, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including of members the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, New York Department of Coast Environmental Conservation, Guard One District Response Advisory Navy Team, Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, Oceanic National and Atmospheric Administration, Coast Guard Headquarters Office of Environmental Management, and Coast Guard Salvage Engineering Response Team to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Kevin Capt. Reed, commander Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine, and possibly any remove environmental potential threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety the of public and protection of the marine environment.???€? The Coimbra was a owned supply ship by Great Britain when ship the was sunk the off beach of Long Island, during World War II by a German For U-boat. media interested in the operation, Chief please contact Warrant Officer Allyson at Conroy 212-514-4292, or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] OCEAN ATLANTIC ???€? Two oils samples pulled from the wreck of the tanker Coimbra are prepared to be sent out for testing after being retrieved one from of the tanks, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast contracted Guard has Resolve Marine Group to a conduct full assessment of oil on remaining the wreck, Coimbra located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, if and feasible, Coast the Guard work will with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from wreck the in order to reduce pollution risks to environment. the The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, off sunk the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] Photos from U.S. Guard Coast District 1 PADET New York Coast Guard crewmembers work New alongside York State of Department Environmental and Conservation Resolve Marine Group to help the assess condition of the Coimbra wreck April on 30, 2019. The Coimbra a was supply ship owned Great by Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 2019. 30, The Coimbra was a supply owned ship by Great Britain when the ship sunk was off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) [SEP] Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD AREA PATCHY OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New Contact: York Sector Long Island Sound Public Affairs Officer Office: 468-4433 (203) After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast postpones Guard underwater assessment of tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. The ???€? U.S. Coast Guard postponed an underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra till the spring of The 2019. early start of the 2018 hurricane season and activity hurricane of Chris impacted logistics and safety raised for concerns the ???€?The safety operation. of our personnel is one of our highest concerns in any mission we conduct,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We are scheduled to resume our joint efforts with Navy the Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, Coast the Guard Atlantic National Strike Team, Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation in the spring of 2019.???€? For more information regarding the underwater assessment of motor the Coimbra tanker please Lt. contact Alaina Fagan at (203) 468-4433. -USCG- [SEP] Taken by Falcon USCG aircraft on SPOTTED 10/22/2009. A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE POSITION. VESSEL'S [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A piece of the tanker Coimbra salvaged from 180 of feet water, rests on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon while two crew members samples label oil for testing, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Group Marine to a conduct full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of N.Y. Shinnecock, If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group remove to oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC ???€? OCEAN A safety monitors officer a diver inside one of the two hyperbaric on chambers deck the of the Shelia Bordelon, May 16, 2019. After diving on the tanker Coimbra wreck 180 feet below the surface, they must spend two hours decompressing safely in the hyperbaric The chamber. U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine conduct Group to a assessment full of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil remains, still and if feasible, the Coast will Guard work with Marine Resolve Group to remove oil from the wreck to in order reduce pollution risks to the environment. Coimbra, The a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast Long of in Island January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Allyson Officer E.T. Conroy) [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New Contact: York Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: 703-0983 (917) PA Detachment
October On 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a recreational diver came to the surface with covered fuel after diving on the British tanker SS Coimbra, was which torpedoed during WWII (located approximately 20 miles of south Shinnecock Long Inlet, Island, NY in about 150 feet of water). Divers have reported sheens coming from the Coimbra for but decades, the article suggests that the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the contacted USCG Ed Levine, NOAA SSC for the region, to discuss the situation. It is expected that an interagency conference call will be held this week to determine whether an investigation evaluate to containment is options, At warranted. the national level, ERD developing is an interagency agreement with the USCG under which the agencies will work to together address from threats vessels sunken off shores US that contain significant volumes of oil. The news recent article is available at this link: http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast 1st Guard District PA Detachment York New Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment of Tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, CT ???€? The U. S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve to Marine conduct an underwater assessment of the tanker Coimbra, from June 19th ???€? 27th. Located approximately 30 miles southeast Shinnecock, of N.Y., the Coimbra sunk was World during War II a by German U-boat. The operation will assess the condition of the tanker and potential to have environmental an impact. During the assessment, boaters are requested to a keep safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a members team including of the Supervisor Navy of Salvage, the Guard Coast Academy Science the Department, Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, New and York Department of Environmental Conservation to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Sector Coast Sector Guard Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of public the and of protection the marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For more information regarding Coimbra the operation, please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at 203-468-4433 or by mail at Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] Chart 12300 [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: PA Coast Guard Detachment York New Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater possible assessment, removal oil operations on Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. The ???€? U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Group Marine to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Group Marine to remove oil the from wreck in order to reduce pollution to risks the environment. The operation is scheduled to take place from April 28th to May 30th. The initial evaluation will assess the condition of the tanker what and potential environmental impact still Based exists. on the assessment, possible oil operations removal will place. take During the operation, are boaters requested to keep a safe distance of 500 from yards the dive ???€?We operation. have assembled a team including members of the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, New York Department Environmental of Conservation, Coast Guard District One Response Advisory Team, Navy Supervisor of Salvage and National Diving, Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Coast Headquarters Guard Office of Environmental Management, and Coast Guard Salvage Engineering Response Team to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This will assessment help determine, and possibly remove any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. top Our priorities are safety of public the and protection of the environment.???€? marine The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coastline of Island, Long during World War by II a U-boat. German For media interested in the operation, contact please Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy at 212-514-4292, or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] OCEAN ATLANTIC Two ???€? oils samples from pulled the wreck of the tanker Coimbra are prepared to be sent out for testing after being retrieved from one of the tanks, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has Resolve contracted Marine Group to conduct a full of assessment remaining oil on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, off sunk the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy) [SEP] E.T. Photos from U.S. Guard Coast District 1 PADET New York Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra on wreck April 2019. 30, The Coimbra was supply ship a owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off coast the of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group help to assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a ship owned supply by Great Britain when the was ship sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German (U.S. Coast U-boat. Guard photo of courtesy Sector Long Island Sound) [SEP] Taken by USCG Falcon on aircraft 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT APPROXIMATELY SHEENING 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Sector Long Island Sound Public Affairs Officer Office: (203) 468-4433 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard postpones underwater assessment of tanker NEW Coimbra HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard postponed an assessment underwater of the motor Coimbra tanker till spring the 2019. The of early start of 2018 the hurricane season and activity of hurricane Chris impacted logistics and raised safety concerns for the operation. ???€?The safety of our is personnel one of our concerns highest in any mission we conduct,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, U.S. commander, Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We are scheduled resume to our joint efforts the with Navy Supervisor Salvage, of the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National and Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, and New York of Department Environmental in Conservation the spring of For 2019.???€? more information regarding the underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at 468-4433. (203) -USCG- [SEP] Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. A SPOTTED 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF SHEENING LIGHT APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A piece the of tanker Coimbra salvaged from 180 feet of water, rests on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon while two members crew label samples oil for testing, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full of assessment oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, If N.Y. substantial oil still remains, and if the feasible, Coast Guard will work with Resolve Group to Marine remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, British-flagged a supply sunk ship, off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German torpedoed U-boat it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety officer monitors a diver inside one of hyperbaric the two chambers on deck the of the Shelia Bordelon, May 16, 2019. After diving on the Coimbra tanker wreck 180 feet below the surface, they spend must two hours safely decompressing the in hyperbaric chamber. The U.S. Guard Coast has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the wreck, located Coimbra approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Marine Resolve Group to remove oil the from wreck in order to reduce pollution the risks to environment. The Coimbra, British-flagged a supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Guard Coast photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] Release News U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment York New Contact: Coast Guard Detachment PA New York Office: 514-4291 (212) After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment
October On 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a recreational came diver the to surface covered with product after diving on the British tanker SS Coimbra, which torpedoed was during WWII (located approximately 20 south miles of Shinnecock Inlet, Long Island, NY in about 150 feet water). of Divers have reported sheens coming from the for Coimbra decades, but the article suggests that the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Ed Levine, NOAA SSC the for to region, discuss the situation. It is expected that an interagency conference call will be held this week to determine whether an investigation to evaluate options, response is warranted. At the national level, ERD is developing an interagency with agreement the USCG under which the agencies will work together to address threats from vessels sunken off US shores that contain volumes significant of oil. The recent news article is at available this link: http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 Hours: After (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater of assessment Tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, CT ???€? The U. S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine conduct to an underwater assessment of tanker the Coimbra, from June 19th ???€? Located 27th. approximately 30 miles of southeast Shinnecock, N.Y., the Coimbra was sunk during World War II by a German U-boat. The operation will the assess condition of the tanker and potential to have an environmental impact. During the assessment, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation to provide consultation for assessment,???€? this said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Sector Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This will assessment help any determine potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public protection and of the marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For more information regarding Coimbra the operation, please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at 203-468-4433 or by mail at Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. [SEP] -USCG- Chart 12300 [SEP] Release News U.S. Guard Coast 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard Detachment PA New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater possible assessment, oil removal operations on Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on Coimbra the located wreck, approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial still oil and remains, if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group remove to oil from wreck the order in to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The operation is scheduled to take place from April 28th to May 30th. The initial evaluation will assess the condition of the tanker what and potential environmental impact still exists. Based on the assessment, possible oil removal will operations place. take During the operation, are boaters requested to keep safe a 500 distance of yards from dive the operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, New York Department of Environmental Conservation, Coast Guard District One Response Advisory Team, Navy of Supervisor Salvage and Diving, National and Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, Coast Guard Headquarters Office of Environmental Management, and Coast Salvage Guard Engineering Response Team to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Guard Coast Sector Long Island ???€?This Sound. help assessment will determine, and possibly any remove environmental potential threat the tanker Our poses. top priorities are of the safety public and protection of the marine environment.???€? The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship sunk was off the coastline of Long Island, World during II War by a German U-boat. For media interested in the operation, please contact Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy at 212-514-4292, or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? Two samples oils from pulled the wreck of the tanker Coimbra are prepared to be out sent for testing after being retrieved from one of the tanks, May The 16, 2019. U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct full a assessment of oil on remaining the Coimbra located wreck, approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. substantial If oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil the from wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island January in 1942 when a German U-boat it. torpedoed (U.S. Coast Guard by photo Chief Officer Warrant Allyson E.T. [SEP] Conroy) Photos from U.S. Coast Guard District 1 PADET New Coast York Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra a was supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, World during II War by a German U-boat. (U.S. Guard Coast photo courtesy of Sector Long Coast Island Sound) Guard crewmembers work alongside New York Department State of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Group Marine to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck April on 30, 2019. The a Coimbra was supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the of coast Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard Sector photo courtesy Long of Island Sound) [SEP] by Taken Falcon USCG aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New Contact: York Sector Long Island Sound Affairs Public Officer Office: (203) Hours: 468-4433 After 703-0983 (917) PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard postpones of underwater assessment tanker Coimbra HAVEN, NEW Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard postponed an underwater of assessment the motor tanker Coimbra till the spring of 2019. The early start of the 2018 hurricane season and activity of hurricane Chris impacted logistics and raised concerns safety for the operation. ???€?The safety of personnel our is one of highest our concerns in any mission we conduct,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We scheduled are to resume our joint efforts with the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy the Science Department, Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation in the spring of 2019.???€? For more information the regarding underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at (203) 468-4433. [SEP] -USCG- Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY OF AREA LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. ATLANTIC [SEP] OCEAN ???€? A piece of the tanker Coimbra from salvaged 180 feet of water, on rests the deck of the Shelia Bordelon two while crew members label oil samples for testing, May 16, 2019. U.S. The Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to a conduct full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Group Marine to oil remove from the wreck in to order reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, the sunk coast off of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Guard Coast photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety officer monitors a diver inside one of the hyperbaric two chambers on the deck of the Shelia May Bordelon, 16, 2019. After diving on the tanker Coimbra wreck 180 below feet the surface, they must spend two hours safely decompressing in the hyperbaric chamber. U.S. The Coast Guard has contracted Marine Resolve Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine to Group oil remove from wreck the in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New Contact: York Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment
On October 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a recreational diver came to the surface covered with oil after on diving the British tanker SS Coimbra, which was torpedoed during WWII approximately (located 20 miles south of Shinnecock Inlet, Long Island, NY in about 150 feet of water). Divers reported have sheens coming from the Coimbra for decades, but the article that suggests the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Ed Levine, NOAA SSC the for region, to discuss situation. the It expected is an that conference interagency call be will held this week determine to whether an investigation to evaluate response options, is warranted. At the level, national ERD is developing an interagency agreement the with USCG under which will the agencies work together to address threats from vessels sunken off US shores that contain significant volumes of oil. The recent news article is available at this link: http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard Detachment PA New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment of Tanker Coimbra HAVEN, CT NEW ???€? The U. S. Coast Guard has contracted Marine Resolve to conduct an underwater assessment of the tanker Coimbra, from June 19th ???€? 27th. 30 Located approximately miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y., the Coimbra was sunk during World War II a by German U-boat. The operation will assess the condition of tanker the and potential to have an environmental impact. During the assessment, boaters are requested keep to a safe of distance 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Academy Coast Guard Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Team, Strike Oceanic National and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental to Conservation provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Sector Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. assessment will ???€?This help determine any potential threat environmental the tanker poses. top Our priorities are of safety the public and protection of the marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For more regarding information the Coimbra please contact operation, Lt. Alaina Fagan at 203-468-4433 or by mail at Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] Chart 12300 [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) After 514-4291 Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment, possible oil removal operations on Coimbra NEW HAVEN, ???€? Conn. The Coast U.S. Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to full conduct a assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles of southeast Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still and remains, if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The operation is scheduled to take place from April 28th to 30th. May The initial evaluation will assess the condition of the tanker and what potential environmental impact Based exists. still on the assessment, possible oil removal operations will take place. During the operation, boaters are to requested keep a safe distance of yards 500 from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, New Department York of Environmental Conservation, Coast Guard District Response One Advisory Team, Navy Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, National Oceanic Atmospheric and Administration, Coast Guard Headquarters Office of Environmental Management, and Coast Guard Salvage Engineering Response to Team provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Kevin Capt. Reed, commander Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help and determine, possibly remove potential any threat environmental the tanker Our poses. top priorities are safety of the public protection and of marine the environment.???€? The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by when Great Britain the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German For U-boat. media interested in the operation, please contact Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy 212-514-4292, at or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? Two oils samples pulled from the wreck of the tanker Coimbra are prepared to be sent out for testing after being from retrieved one of the tanks, May 16, 2019. U.S. The Coast Guard contracted has Resolve Marine Group conduct to a full assessment of remaining oil on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, if and feasible, the Coast will Guard work with Resolve Marine Group to remove from oil the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. Coimbra, The a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] Photos from U.S. Coast Guard District 1 PADET New York Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group help to assess the condition of the Coimbra on wreck April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a ship supply owned by Great Britain the when ship was sunk the off coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside York New State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of Coimbra the wreck on 30, April The 2019. was Coimbra a supply ship owned by Great Britain when ship the was sunk off the coast Long of Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) [SEP] Taken by Falcon USCG aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF SHEENING LIGHT APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S [SEP] POSITION. News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Sector Long Island Public Sound Affairs Officer Office: (203) 468-4433 After Hours: (917) PA 703-0983 Detachment New online York newsroom Coast Guard postpones underwater assessment of tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard postponed an underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra the till spring of 2019. The start early of 2018 the season hurricane and activity of hurricane Chris impacted logistics and raised safety concerns for the operation. safety ???€?The of our personnel is one of our highest concerns in any mission conduct,???€? we said Kevin Capt. Reed, commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We are scheduled to resume our joint efforts with the Navy Supervisor of the Salvage, Coast Guard Science Academy Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric and Administration, New York Department of Environmental Conservation in spring the of 2019.???€? For more information regarding the underwater assessment the of motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at (203) 468-4433. -USCG- [SEP] Taken by aircraft USCG Falcon on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD AREA PATCHY OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN A ???€? piece of tanker the Coimbra salvaged 180 feet from of water, on rests deck the of the Shelia Bordelon while two crew members label oil samples for testing, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If still substantial oil remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck order in to pollution reduce risks to the environment. The Coimbra, British-flagged a supply ship, sunk off the coast of Island Long in January when 1942 a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety officer monitors a diver inside of one two the hyperbaric chambers on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon, May 16, 2019. After diving on the tanker Coimbra wreck 180 feet below surface, the they must spend two hours safely decompressing in hyperbaric the chamber. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Guard Coast will with work Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce risks pollution to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk coast off the Long of Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed (U.S. it. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) News [SEP] Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st PA District New Detachment York Coast Contact: Guard PA New Detachment York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 Detachment PA
On October 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a recreational diver came to the surface with covered product after diving on the British tanker SS which Coimbra, was torpedoed WWII during (located approximately 20 miles south of Shinnecock Inlet, Long Island, in NY about 150 feet of water). Divers have reported sheens coming from Coimbra the for decades, the but article suggests that the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Ed Levine, NOAA SSC for the region, to discuss the situation. is It expected that an interagency conference call will be held week this determine to whether an investigation to evaluate mitigation options, is warranted. At the national level, ERD is developing an interagency agreement with the USCG under which the agencies work will together address to threats from vessels sunken off US shores that contain significant volumes of oil. The recent news article is available at link: this http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment York New Contact: Guard PA Coast Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 Detachment PA New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment of Tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, CT ???€? The U. S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine conduct an to underwater assessment of the tanker Coimbra, from June 19th ???€? 27th. Located approximately 30 miles southeast of N.Y., Shinnecock, Coimbra the was sunk during World War II by a German U-boat. The operation will assess the condition of the tanker and potential to have an environmental impact. During the assessment, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. have ???€?We assembled a team including of members the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science the Department, Coast Guard Strike Atlantic Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Sector Coast Guard Sector Long Island ???€?This Sound. assessment help will determine any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public and protection of the marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For more information regarding the Coimbra operation, please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at 203-468-4433 or mail by Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. at -USCG- [SEP] Chart 12300 [SEP] News U.S. Release Guard Coast 1st District Detachment PA New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: 703-0983 (917) PA Detachment York New online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment, possible oil removal operations on NEW Coimbra HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard contracted has Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining the on Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still and if remains, feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order reduce to pollution risks to the environment. The operation is scheduled to take place from April 28th to May 30th. The initial evaluation will assess the condition of the tanker and potential what environmental impact still exists. Based on the assessment, possible removal oil operations will take place. During the operation, boaters requested are to keep a safe of distance 500 yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Guard Coast Atlantic Strike Team, York New Department of Environmental Conservation, Coast Guard District One Response Team, Advisory Navy Supervisor of Salvage Diving, National and Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Guard Coast Headquarters Office Environmental of Management, Coast and Guard Salvage Engineering Response Team to provide consultation for this assessment,???€? Capt. said Kevin Reed, commander Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine, and possibly remove any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top are priorities of safety the public and protection of environment.???€? the marine The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain the when ship was sunk off the shoreline of Long during Island, World War II by a German U-boat. For media interested in the operation, please contact Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy at or 212-514-4292, Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? Two oils samples pulled from the wreck of the tanker Coimbra are prepared to be out sent for testing after being from retrieved one of the tanks, May 16, The 2019. U.S. Guard Coast has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of remaining oil on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, If N.Y. oil substantial still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. Coimbra, The a British-flagged ship, supply sunk off the coast of Long in Island 1942 January when a U-boat German torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer E.T. Allyson Conroy) [SEP] Photos from U.S. Coast Guard District 1 PADET New York Coast Guard crewmembers work New alongside State York Department Conservation of Environmental and Marine Resolve to Group help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, The 2019. Coimbra was a supply ship owned Great by Britain the when ship was off sunk the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine to Group help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a ship supply owned by Great Britain when ship the was sunk off coast the of Long Island, during World War II by a German (U.S. U-boat. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) [SEP] Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF SHEENING LIGHT 2.5 APPROXIMATELY NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Sector Long Island Sound Public Affairs Officer Office: (203) 468-4433 After Hours: 703-0983 (917) PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard postpones underwater assessment of tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, ???€? Conn. The U.S. Coast Guard an postponed assessment underwater of motor the tanker Coimbra till the spring of The 2019. early start of the 2018 hurricane season and activity hurricane of Chris impacted logistics and raised concerns safety for the operation. ???€?The safety of our personnel is one of highest our concerns in any mission we conduct,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We are scheduled to resume joint our efforts with the Supervisor Navy of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science the Department, Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric and Administration, New York Department of Environmental Conservation in the spring of 2019.???€? For more information regarding the underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Fagan Alaina at (203) 468-4433. [SEP] -USCG- Taken by USCG aircraft Falcon on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] ATLANTIC ???€? OCEAN A piece of the tanker Coimbra salvaged from feet 180 of water, rests on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon while two crew members oil label samples for testing, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment oil of on remaining the Coimbra approximately wreck, located 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group remove oil to from the wreck order in to reduce risks pollution to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 a when U-boat German torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety a officer monitors diver inside one of the two hyperbaric chambers on the deck the of Shelia Bordelon, May 16, 2019. After diving on the tanker Coimbra wreck feet below 180 the surface, they must spend two hours safely decompressing the in hyperbaric chamber. U.S. The Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Marine Resolve to Group remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long in Island January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard by photo Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy) E.T. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New Contact: York Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) After 514-4291 Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment
On October 15, the East Hampton Star reported that a recreational diver came to the surface covered with oil after diving on the British tanker SS Coimbra, which was torpedoed during WWII (located approximately miles 20 south Shinnecock of Inlet, Long Island, NY in about 150 feet of water). Divers have sheens reported coming from the Coimbra for decades, but the article suggests that the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Ed Levine, NOAA SSC for the region, to the discuss situation. It is expected that an interagency conference call will be held week this to determine whether an investigation to response evaluate options, is warranted. At the national ERD level, is an developing interagency agreement with the USCG under which the agencies will work together to address threats from vessels sunken off US shores that contain significant volumes of oil. The recent news article is available at this http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. link: [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After (917) Hours: 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Guard Coast to conduct underwater assessment of Tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, CT ???€? The U. S. Coast has Guard contracted Resolve Marine to conduct an underwater assessment of tanker the from Coimbra, June 19th ???€? 27th. approximately Located 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y., the Coimbra was sunk during World War II by a German The U-boat. operation will assess condition the of the tanker and potential to have environmental an impact. During the assessment, boaters are requested keep to a safe distance 500 of yards from the dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Academy Guard Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Team, Strike National Oceanic Atmospheric and Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation to provide for consultation this said assessment,???€? Capt. Kevin commander Reed, Sector Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public and of protection the marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For information more regarding the Coimbra operation, please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at 203-468-4433 or by mail at Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. [SEP] -USCG- Chart 12300 [SEP] News Release Coast U.S. Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Guard Coast PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 Detachment PA New York online newsroom Coast Guard conduct to underwater assessment, possible oil removal operations Coimbra on NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil on remaining the Coimbra wreck, approximately located 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, If N.Y. substantial still remains, oil and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work Resolve with Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to pollution reduce risks to the environment. The operation is scheduled to take place from April 28th to 30th. May The initial evaluation will assess the condition of the tanker and what potential environmental impact still exists. Based on the possible assessment, oil removal operations will take place. During the operation, boaters are requested to keep a safe distance of 500 yards the from dive operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members the of Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, New York Department of Environmental Conservation, Coast District Guard One Response Advisory Team, Navy Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, National Oceanic and Administration, Atmospheric Guard Coast Headquarters Office of Environmental Management, and Coast Guard Engineering Salvage Response Team to provide consultation for this said assessment,???€? Kevin Capt. commander Reed, Coast Guard Sector Long Sound. Island ???€?This assessment will help determine, and possibly remove any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public and protection of the marine environment.???€? The Coimbra was a ship supply owned by Great Britain when the ship was off sunk the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. For interested in media the operation, please contact Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy at 212-514-4292, or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? Two oils samples pulled from the wreck of the tanker Coimbra are to prepared be sent for out testing after retrieved being from one of the tanks, May 2019. 16, The U.S. Coast Guard contracted has Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil on remaining the Coimbra wreck, located 30 approximately miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. substantial If oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to environment. the The Coimbra, British-flagged supply a ship, off sunk the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat torpedoed it. Coast (U.S. Guard photo by Warrant Chief Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] Photos from U.S. Coast Guard District 1 PADET New York Coast Guard crewmembers work alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was supply ship a owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by German a U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island Sound) Coast Guard crewmembers alongside work New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the of condition the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the coast of Long Island, during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy of Sector Long Island [SEP] Sound) Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA LIGHT OF SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 OF NM NORTH VESSEL'S THE POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Sector Long Island Sound Public Affairs Officer Office: (203) 468-4433 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard postpones underwater assessment of tanker NEW Coimbra Conn. HAVEN, ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard postponed an underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra till spring the of 2019. The start early the of hurricane 2018 and season activity of hurricane Chris logistics impacted and raised safety concerns for the operation. ???€?The of safety our personnel is one of our highest concerns in any mission we conduct,???€? said Kevin Capt. Reed, commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We are scheduled to resume our joint efforts with the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science the Department, Coast Guard Atlantic Strike Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New York Department of Environmental Conservation in the spring of 2019.???€? For information more regarding the assessment underwater of the motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at (203) -USCG- 468-4433. [SEP] Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 PATCHY YARD AREA OF LIGHT SHEENING APPROXIMATELY NM 2.5 NORTH OF THE POSITION. VESSEL'S [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN A ???€? piece of the tanker Coimbra salvaged from 180 feet of water, rests on of the deck the Shelia Bordelon while two crew members label oil samples for testing, May 16, 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the wreck, Coimbra approximately located 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine to Group oil remove from the wreck in order to reduce risks pollution to environment. the The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk the off coast of Long Island in 1942 January when a U-boat German torpedoed it. (U.S. Guard Coast photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety officer monitors a diver inside of one hyperbaric two the chambers on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon, May 16, 2019. diving After on the tanker Coimbra wreck 180 feet below the surface, they must spend two hours safely decompressing in the chamber. hyperbaric The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Group Marine to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the wreck, Coimbra located approximately 30 southeast miles of N.Y. Shinnecock, If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group remove to oil from the wreck in order to reduce risks pollution to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged ship, supply sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a U-boat German torpedoed it. (U.S. Guard Coast photo by Chief Warrant Officer E.T. Allyson Conroy) [SEP] Release News U.S. Coast 1st Guard District PA Detachment New York Contact: Guard Coast PA New Detachment York Office: (212) 514-4291 Hours: After (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment
On October 15, the East Star Hampton reported that a recreational diver came to the surface covered with oil after diving on the British tanker SS Coimbra, which was torpedoed during WWII (located approximately 20 miles south of Shinnecock Inlet, Long Island, NY about in feet of 150 water). Divers have reported sheens coming from the Coimbra for decades, but the article suggests that the leakage may be getting worse. Last Thursday, the USCG contacted Ed Levine, NOAA SSC for the region, to discuss the situation. It is expected that an interagency call conference will be held this week to determine whether investigation an to evaluate remediation options, is warranted. At the national level, ERD is developing an interagency agreement with the USCG under which the agencies will together work to threats address from vessels sunken off shores US that contain significant volumes of The oil. recent news article is available at link: this http://www.easthamptonstar.com/dnn/Home/News/TorpedoedTankerStillLeakingOil/tabid/10288/Default.aspx. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard Detachment PA New York Office: (212) After 514-4291 Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater assessment of Tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, CT ???€? The U. S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine to conduct an underwater assessment of the tanker Coimbra, from June 19th ???€? 27th. Located 30 miles approximately southeast of Shinnecock, the N.Y., Coimbra was sunk during World War II by a German U-boat. The operation will assess the condition of the tanker and potential to have an environmental impact. During the assessment, are boaters requested to keep a safe distance 500 of yards from dive the operation. ???€?We have assembled a team including members of the Navy Supervisor of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science Department, the Coast Guard Atlantic Strike National Team, Oceanic and Atmospheric and Administration, New York Department of Environmental Conservation to provide consultation assessment,???€? for this said Capt. Kevin Reed, commander Sector Coast Guard Sector Island Long Sound. ???€?This will assessment help determine any potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public and protection the of marine environment.???€? EDITOR'S NOTE: For more information regarding the Coimbra operation, please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at or 203-468-4433 by mail at Alaina.M.Fagan@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] Chart 12300 [SEP] Release News U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA York Detachment New Contact: Guard Coast PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) PA 703-0983 Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard to conduct underwater possible assessment, oil removal operations on Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on Coimbra approximately the wreck, located 30 miles southeast Shinnecock, of If N.Y. substantial still oil remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to environment. the The operation is scheduled to take place April from 28th to May 30th. The initial evaluation will assess the condition of the and tanker what potential environmental impact still exists. Based the on assessment, possible oil removal operations will take place. the During operation, boaters are to requested keep a safe distance of 500 yards from the dive operation. have ???€?We assembled a team including members of the Coast Guard Strike Atlantic Team, New York Department of Environmental Conservation, Coast Guard District One Response Advisory Team, Navy Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Coast Guard Headquarters Office of Environmental Management, and Coast Guard Salvage Engineering Response to Team provide consultation for this assessment,???€? said Capt. Kevin Reed, Coast commander Sector Guard Island Long Sound. ???€?This assessment will help determine, and possibly any remove potential environmental threat the tanker poses. Our top priorities are safety of the public and protection the of marine environment.???€? The was Coimbra a supply ship owned by Great Britain when the ship was sunk off the beach of Long Island, during World War II by German a U-boat. For media in the interested operation, please contact Chief Warrant Officer Allyson Conroy at 212-514-4292, or Allyson.E.Conroy@uscg.mil. -USCG- [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? Two oils samples pulled from the wreck of tanker the Coimbra are prepared be to sent out for testing after being retrieved from one of the tanks, 16, May 2019. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil on remaining the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, N.Y. substantial If oil still remains, and if the feasible, Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, sunk off the coast of Long Island in January 1942 when a U-boat German torpedoed it. Coast (U.S. Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] Photos from U.S. Coast Guard District 1 PADET New York Coast Guard work crewmembers alongside New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help assess the condition of the Coimbra wreck April on 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a supply ship owned by Great Britain the when ship was sunk off the coast of Island, Long during World War II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo of courtesy Long Sector Island Sound) Guard Coast crewmembers work alongside York New Department State of Environmental Conservation and Resolve Marine Group to help the assess condition of the Coimbra wreck on April 30, 2019. The Coimbra was a supply by ship owned Great Britain when the was ship sunk off the coast of Island, Long during War World II by a German U-boat. (U.S. Coast Guard photo courtesy Sector of Long Island Sound) [SEP] Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY AREA OF LIGHT APPROXIMATELY SHEENING 2.5 NM NORTH OF THE VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] News Release U.S. Coast Guard 1st District PA New Detachment York Contact: Sector Long Island Sound Public Affairs Officer Office: (203) 468-4433 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment New York online newsroom Coast Guard underwater postpones assessment of tanker Coimbra NEW HAVEN, Conn. ???€? The U.S. Coast Guard postponed an underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra till the spring of The 2019. early start of the 2018 hurricane season and activity hurricane of Chris impacted logistics and safety raised concerns for the operation. ???€?The safety of our personnel is one of our highest concerns in any mission we conduct,???€? said Reed, Capt. Kevin commander, U.S. Coast Guard Sector Long Island Sound. ???€?We are scheduled to resume our joint efforts with the Supervisor Navy of Salvage, the Coast Guard Academy Science the Department, Coast Guard Strike Atlantic Team, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and New Department York of Environmental Conservation in the spring of 2019.???€? For more information regarding the underwater assessment of the motor tanker Coimbra please contact Lt. Alaina Fagan at (203) 468-4433. [SEP] -USCG- Taken by USCG Falcon aircraft on 10/22/2009. SPOTTED A 650X10 YARD PATCHY LIGHT AREA OF SHEENING APPROXIMATELY 2.5 NM NORTH THE OF VESSEL'S POSITION. [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN A ???€? piece of the tanker Coimbra salvaged feet from 180 of water, rests the on deck of the Shelia Bordelon while two crew members label oil samples for testing, 2019. May 16, The U.S. has contracted Coast Guard Resolve Marine Group to conduct full a assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, located approximately 30 miles southeast of Shinnecock, If N.Y. substantial oil still and remains, if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Resolve Marine Group to remove oil from the wreck in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply sunk ship, off the of coast Long Island in January 1942 when a German U-boat it. torpedoed (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] ATLANTIC OCEAN ???€? A safety officer monitors a diver inside one of the two hyperbaric chambers on the deck of the Shelia Bordelon, May 16, 2019. diving the After on Coimbra tanker wreck 180 feet below they the surface, must spend two hours safely decompressing in the hyperbaric chamber. The U.S. Coast Guard has contracted Resolve Marine Group to conduct a full assessment of oil remaining on the Coimbra wreck, approximately located miles 30 of southeast Shinnecock, N.Y. If substantial oil still remains, and if feasible, the Coast Guard will work with Marine Group Resolve remove to oil from wreck the in order to reduce pollution risks to the environment. The Coimbra, a British-flagged supply ship, off sunk the coast of Long Island in January when 1942 a German U-boat torpedoed it. (U.S. Coast Guard photo by Chief Warrant Officer Allyson E.T. Conroy) [SEP] News Release Coast U.S. Guard 1st District PA Detachment New York Contact: Coast Guard PA Detachment New York Office: (212) 514-4291 After Hours: (917) 703-0983 PA Detachment
